--- Page 1 ---
Translated from the French by —
Richard Seaver and 1 |
Helen R. Lane

) Se SS S&S SS

‘Ann Arbor Paperbacks ‘The University of Michigan Press

AndréBretoen «= SS
WeWkIS WwW

So strong is the belief in life, in what is most fragile in life
—real life, | mean—that in the end this belief is lost. Man,
that inveterate dreamer, daily more discontent with his
destiny, has trouble assessing the objects he has been led to
use, objects that his nonchalance has brought his way, or
that he has earned through his own efforts, almost always
through his own efforts, for he has agreed to work, at
least he has not refused to try his luck (or what he calls his
juck!). At this point he feels extremely modest: he knows
what women he has had, what silly affairs he has been in-
volved in; he is unimpressed by his wealth or poverty, in
this respect he is still a newborn babe and, as for the ap-
proval of his conscience, I confess that he does very nicely
without it. If he still retains a certain lucidity, all he can
do is turn back toward his childhood which, however his
guides and mentors may have botched it, still strikes him
as somehow charming. There, the absence of any known
restrictions allows him the perspective of several lives lived
at once; this illusion becomes firmly rooted within him;
now he is only interested in the fleeting, the extreme fa-
cility of everything. Children set off each day without a

3


--- Page 2 ---
4 Manifestoes of Surrealism

worry in the world. Everything is near at hand, the worst
material conditions are fine. The woods are white or black,
one will never sleep.

But it is true that we would not dare venture so far,
it is not merely a question of distance. Threat is piled upon
threat, one yields, abandons a portion of the terrain to be
conquered, This imagination which knows no bounds is
henceforth allowed to be exercised only in strict accordance
with the laws of an arbitrary utility; it is incapable of as-
suming this inferior role for very long and, in the vicinity
of the twentieth year, generally prefers to abandon man to
his lusterless fate,

Though he may later try to pull himself together upon
occasion, having felt that he is losing by slow degrees all
reason for living, incapable as he has become of being able
to rise to some exceptional situation such as love, he will
hardly succeed. This is because he henceforth belongs body
and soul to an imperative practical necessity which de-
mands his constant attention, None of his gestures will be
expansive, none of his ideas generous or far-reaching. In
his mind’s eye, events real or imagined will be seen only
as they relate to a welter of similar events, events in which
he has not participated, abortive events, What am I say-
ing: he will judge them in relationship to one of these
events whose consequences are more reassuring than the
others. On no account will he view them as his salvation.

Beloved imagination, what I most like in you is your
unsparing quality.

The mere word “freedom” is the only one that still
excites me. I deem it capable of indefinitely sustaining the
old human fanaticism, It doubtless satisfies my only legiti-
mate aspiration. Among all the many misfortunes to which
we are heir, it is only fair to admit that we are allowed the
greatest degree of freedom of thought. It is up to us not to
misuse it. To reduce the imagination to a state of slavery

Manifesto of Surrealism 5

—even though it would mean the elimination of what is
commonly called happiness—is to betray all sense of abso-
lute justice within oneself. Imagination alone offers me
some intimation of what can be, and this is enough to re-
move to some slight degree the terrible injunction; enough,
too, to allow me to devote myself to it without fear of mak-
ing a mistake (as though it were possible to make a bigger
mistake). Where does it begin to turn bad, and where does
the mind’s stability cease? For the mind, is the possibility
of erring not rather the contingency of good?

There remains madness, “the madness that one locks
up,” as it has aptly been described. That madness or an-
other, ... We all know, in fact, that the insane owe their
incarceration to a tiny number of legally reprehensible
acts and that, were it not for these acts their freedom (or
what we see as their freedom) would not be threatened. I
am willing to admit that they are, to some degree, victims
of their imagination, in that it induces them not to pay
attention to certain rules—outside of which the species
feels itself threatened—which we are all supposed to know
and respect. But their profound indifference to the way in
which we judge them, and even to the various punishments
meted out to them, allows us to suppose that they derive
a great deal of comfort and consolation from their imagi
nation, that they enjoy their madness sufficiently to en-
dure the thought that its validity does not extend beyond
themselves. And, indeed, hallucinations, illusions, etc., are
not a source of trifling pleasure. The best controlled sen-
suality partakes of it, and I know that there are many
evenings when I would gladly tame that pretty hand which,
during the last pages of Taine’s L'Intelligence, indulges
in some curious misdeeds. I could spend my whole life pry-
ing loose the secrets of the insane. These people are honest
toa fault, and their naiveté has no peer but my own. Chris-
topher Columbus should have set out to discover America


--- Page 3 ---
6 — Manifestoes of Surrealism

with a boatload of madmen. And note how this madness
has taken shape, and endured.

Jt is not the fear of madness which will oblige us to leave
the flag of imagination furled.

The case against the realistic attitude demands to be
examined, following the case against the materialistic atti-
tude. The latter, more poetic in fact than the former, ad-
mittedly implies on the part of man a kind of monstrous
pride which, admittedly, is monstrous, but not a new and
more complete decay. It should above all be viewed as a
welcome reaction against certain ridiculous tendencies of
spiritualism. Finally, it is not incompatible with a certain
nobility of thought.

By contrast, the realistic attitude, inspired by posi-
tivism, from Saint Thomas Aquinas to Anatole France,
clearly seems to me to be hostile to any intellectual or
moral advancement, I loathe it, for it is made up of medi-
ocrity, hate, and dull conceit. It is this attitude which today
gives birth to these ridiculous books, these insulting plays.
It constantly feeds on and derives strength from the news-
papers and stultifies both science and art by assiduously
flattering the lowest of tastes; clarity bordering on stu-
pidity, a dog’s life. The activity of the best minds feels the
effects of it; the law of the lowest common denominator
finally prevails upon them as it does upon the others. An
amusing result of this state of affairs, in literature for ex-
ample, is the generous supply of novels. Each person adds
his personal little “observation” to the whole, As a cleans-
ing antidote to all this, M. Paul Valéry recently suggested
that an anthology be compiled in which the largest possible
number of opening passages from novels be offered; the
resulting insanity, he predicted, would be a source of con-
siderable edification. The most famous authors would be
included. Such a thought reflects great credit on Paul

Manifesto of Surrealism = 7

Valéry who, some time ago, speaking of novels, assured me
that, so far as he was concerned, he would continue to re-
frain from writing: “The Marquise went out at five.” But
has he kept his word?

If the purely informative style, of which the sentence
just quoted is a prime example, is virtually the rule rather
than the exception in the novel form, it is because, in all
fairness, the author's ambition is severely circumscribed.
The circumstantial, needlessly specific nature of each
of their notations leads me to believe that they are perpe-
trating a joke at my expense. I am spared not even one of
the character's slightest vacillations: will he be fairhaired?
what will his name be? will we first meet him during the
summer? So many questions resolved once and for all, as
chance directs; the only discretionary power left me is to
close the book, which I am careful to do somewhere in the
vicinity of the first page. And the descriptions! There is
nothing to which their vacuity can be compared; they are
nothing but so many superimposed images taken from
some stock catalogue, which the author utilizes more and
more whenever he chooses; he seizes the opportunity to slip
me his postcards, he tries to make me agree with him about
the clichés:

The small room into which the young man was shown
was covered with yellow wallpaper: there were geraniums
in the windows, which were covered with muslin curtains;
the setting sun cast a harsh light over the entire setting. ...
There was nothing special about the room, The furniture,
of yellow wood, was all very old. A sofa with a tall back
turned down, an oval table opposite the sofa, a dressing
table and a mirror set against the pierglass, some chairs
along the walls, two or three etchings of no value portray-
ing some German girls with birds in their hands—such
were the furnishings.*

*Dostoevski, Crime and Punishment.


--- Page 4 ---
8 — Manifestoes of Surrealism

Tam in no mood to admit that the mind is interested
in occupying itself with such matters, even fleetingly. It may
be argued that this school-boy description has its place, and
that at this juncture of the book the author has his reasons
for burdening me. Nevertheless he is wasting his time, for I
refuse to go into his room. Others’ laziness or fatigue does
not interest me. I have too unstable a notion of the continu-
ity of life to equate or compare my moments of depression
or weakness with my best moments. When one ceases to
feel, I am of the opinion one should keep quiet. And I
would like it understood that 1 am not accusing or con-
demning lack of originality as such. I am only saying that
1 do not take particular note of the empty moments of my
life, that it may be unworthy for any man to crystallize
those which seem to him to be so. I shall, with your permis-
sion, ignore the description of that room, and many more
like it.

Not so fast, there; I'm getting into the area of psy-
chology, a subject about which I shall be careful not to
joke.

The author attacks a character and, this being settled
upon, parades his hero to and fro across the world. No
matter what happens, this hero, whose actions and reac-
tions are admirably predictable, is compelled not to thwart
or upset—even though he looks as though he is—the calcula-
tions of which he is the object. The currents of life can
appear to lift him up, roll him over, cast him down, he
will still belong to this readymade human type. A simple
game of chess which doesn’t interest me in the least—man,
whoever he may be, being for me a mediocre opponent.
What I cannot bear are those wretched discussions relative
to such and such a move, since winning or losing is not
in question, And if the game is not worth the candle,
if objective reason does a frightful job—as indeed it does
—of serving him who calls upon it, is it not fitting and
proper to avoid all contact with these categories? “Diver-
sity is so vast that every different tone of voice, every step,

Manifesto of Surrealism

cough, every wipe of the nose, every sneeze... ."* If in a
cluster of grapes there are no two alike, why do you want
me to describe this grape by the other, by all the others,
why do you want me to make a palatable grape? Our brains
are dulled by the incurable mania of wanting to make the
unknown known, classifiable. The desire for analysis wins
out over the sentiments.** The result is statements of un-
due length whose persuasive power is attributable solely to
their strangeness and which impress the reader only by the
abstract quality of their vocabulary, which moreover is ill-
defined. If the general ideas that philosophy has thus far
come up with as topics of discussion revealed by their very
nature their definitive incursion into a broader or more
general area, I would be the first to greet the news with
joy. But up till now it has been nothing but idle repartee;
the flashes of wit and other niceties vie in concealing from
us the true thought in search of itself, instead of concentrat-
ing on obtaining successes. It seems to me that every act is
its own justification, at least for the person who has been
capable of committing it, that it is endowed with a radiant
power which the slightest gloss is certain to diminish. Be-
cause of this gloss, it even in a sense ceases to happen. It
gains nothing to be thus distinguished. Stendhal’s heroes
are subject to the comments and appraisals—appraisals
which are more or less successful—made by that author,
which add not one whit to their glory. Where we really find
them again is at the point at which Stendhal has lost them.

We are still living under the reign of logic: this, of course,
is what I have been driving at. But in this day and age
logical methods are applicable only to solving problems
of secondary interest. The absolute rationalism that is still
in vogue allows us to consider only facts relating directly
to our experience. Logical ends, on the contrary, escape

*Pascal.
**Barres, Proust.


--- Page 5 ---
10 Manifestoes of Surrealism

us. It is pointless to add that experience itself has found
itself increasingly circumscribed. It paces back and forth
in a cage from which it is more and more difficult to make
it emerge. It too leans for support on what is most im-
mediately expedient, and it is protected by the sentinels of
common sense. Under the pretense of civilization and
progress, we have managed to banish from the mind every-
thing that may rightly or wrongly be termed superstition,
or fancy; forbidden is any kind of search for truth which
is not in conformance with accepted practices, It was, ap-
parently, by pure chance that a part of our mental world
which we pretended not to be concerned with any longer—
and, in my opinion by far the most important part—has
been brought back to light. For this we must give thanks
to the discoveries of Sigmund Freud. On the basis of these
discoveries a current of opinion is finally forming by means
of which the human explorer will be able to carry his in-
vestigations much further, authorized as he will henceforth
be not to confine himself solely to the most summary real-
ities, The imagination is perhaps on the point of reassert-
ing itself, of reclaiming its rights, If the depths of our mind
contain within it strange forces capable of augmenting
those on the surface, or of waging a victorious battle against
them, there is every reason to seize them—first to seize
them, then, if need be, to submit them to the control of our
reason. The analysts themselves have everything to gain by
it. But it is worth noting that no means has been designated
a priori for carrying out this undertaking, that until fur-
ther notice it can be construed to be the province of poets
as well as scholars, and that its success is not dependent
upon the more or less capricious paths that will be fol-
lowed.

Freud very rightly brought his critical faculties to bear
upon the dream, Jt is, in fact, inadmissible that this con-
siderable portion of psychic activity (since, at least from

Manifesto of Surrealism 11

man’s birth until his death, thought offers no solution of
continuity, the sum of the moments of dream, from the
point of view of time, and taking into consideration only
the time of pure dreaming, that is the dreams of sleep, is
not inferior to the sum of the moments of reality, or, to
be more precisely limiting, the moments of waking) has
still today been so grossly neglected. 1 have always been
amazed at the way an ordinary observer lends so much
more credence and attaches so much more importance to
waking events than to those occurring in dreams. It is
because man, when he ceases to sleep, is above all the play-
thing of his memory, and in its normal state memory takes
pleasure in weakly retracing for him the circumstances of
the dream, in stripping it of any real importance, and in
dismissing the only determinant from the point where he
thinks he has left it a few hours before: this firm hope, this
concern. He is under the impression of continuing some-
thing that is worthwhile. Thus the dream finds itself re-
duced to a mere parenthesis, as is the night. And, like the
night, dreams generally contribute little to furthering our
understanding, This curious state of affairs seems to me to
call for certain reflections:

1) Within the limits where they operate (or are
thought to operate) dreams give every evidence of being
continuous and show signs of organization. Memory alone
arrogates to itself the right to excerpt from dreams, to
ignore the transitions, and to depict for us rather a series
of dreams than the dream itself. By the same token, at any
given moment we have only a distinct notion of realities,
the coordination of which is a question of will.* What is

“Account must be taken of the depth of the dream, For the
most part I retain only what I can glean from its most superficial
ayers. What I most enjoy contemplating about a dream is every-
thing that sinks back below the surface in a waking state, everything
T have forgotten about my activities in the course of the preceding
day, dark foliage, stupid branches, In “reality,” likewise, I prefer
to fall.


--- Page 6 ---
12 Manifestoes of Surrealism

worth noting is that nothing allows us to presuppose a
greater dissipation of the elements of which the dream is
constituted. I am sorry to have to speak about it according
to a formula which in principle excludes the dream. When
will we have sleeping logicians, sleeping philosophers? I
would like to sleep, in order to surrender myself to the
dreamers, the way I surrender myself to those who read me
with eyes wide open; in order to stop imposing, in this
realm, the conscious rhythm of my thought. Perhaps my
dream last night follows that of the night before, and will
be continued the next night, with an exemplary strictness.
It’s quite possible, as the saying goes. And since it has not
been proved in the slightest that, in doing so, the “reality”
with which I am kept busy continues to exist in the state of
dream, that it does not sink back down into the immemo-
tial, why should I not grant to dreams what I occasionally
refuse reality, that is, this value of certainty in itself which,
in its own time, is not open to my repudiation? Why should
J not expect from the sign of the dream more than I expect
from a degree of consciousness which is daily more acute?
Can’t the dream also be used in solving the fundamental
questions of life? Are these questions the same in one case
as in the other and, in the dream, do these questions already
exist? Is the dream any less restrictive or punitive than the
test? I am growing old and, more than that reality to which
I believe I subject myself, it is perhaps the dream, the dif-
ference with which I treat the dream, which makes me grow
old.

2) Let me come back again to the waking state. I have
no choice but to consider it a phenomenon of interference.
Not only does the mind display, in this state, a strange
tendency to lose its bearings (as evidenced by the slips and
mistakes the secrets of which are just beginning to be re-
vealed to us), but, what is more, it does not appear that,
when the mind is functioning normally, it really responds
to anything but the suggestions which come to it from the

Manifesto of Surrealism 13,

depths of that dark night to which I commend it. However
conditioned it may be, its balance is relative. It scarcely
dares express itself and, if it does, it confines itself to verify-
ing that such and such an idea, or such and such a woman,
has made an impression on it. What impression it would be
hard pressed to say, by which it reveals the degree of its sub-
jectivity, and nothing more, This idea, this woman, disturb
it, they tend to make it less severe. What they do is
isolate the mind for a second from its solvent and spirit it
to heaven, as the beautiful precipitate it can be, that it is.
When all else fails, it then calls upon chance, a divinity
even more obscure than the others to whom it ascribes all
its aberrations. Who can say to me that the angle by which
that idea which affects it is offered, that what it likes in
the eye of that woman is not precisely what links it to
its dream, binds it to those fundamental facts which,
through its own fault, it has lost? And if things were dif-
ferent, what might it be capable of? 1 would like to pro-
vide it with the key to this corridor.

3) The mind of the man who dreams is fully satished
by what happens to him. The agonizing question of pos-
sibility is no longer pertinent. Kill, fly faster, love to your
heart’s content, And if you should die, are you not certain
of reawaking among the dead? Let yourself be carried
along, events will not tolerate your interference. You are
nameless, The ease of everything is priceless.

What reason, J ask, a reason so much vaster than the
other, makes dreams seem so natural and allows me to wel-
come unreservedly a welter of episodes so strange that they
would confound me now as I write? And yet I can believe
my eyes, my ears; this great day has arrived, this beast has
spoken,

I man’s awaking is harder, if it breaks the spell too
abruptly, it is because he has been led to make for himself
too impoverished a notion of atonement.

4) From the moment when it is subjected toa method-


--- Page 7 ---
14 Manifestoes of Surrealism

ical examination, when, by means yet to be determined,
we succeed in recording the contents of dreams in their en-
tirety (and that presupposes a discipline of memory span-
ning generations; but let us nonetheless begin by noting
the most salient facts), when its graph will expand with
unparalleled volume and regularity, we may hope that the
mysteries which really are not will give way to the great
Mystery. I believe in the future resolution of these two
states, dream and reality, which are seemingly so contra-
dictory, into a kind of absolute reality, a surreality, if one
may so speak. It is in quest of this surreality that I am
going, certain not to find it but too unmindful of my death
not to calculate to some slight degree the joys of its pos-
session.

A story is told according to which Saint-Pol-Roux, in
times gone by, used to have a notice posted on the door of
his manor house in Camaret, every evening before he went
tosleep, which read: THE POET IS WORKING.

A great deal more could be said, but in passing I
merely wanted to touch upon a subject which in itself
would require a very long and much more detailed dis-
cussion; | shall come back to it. At this juncture, my inten-
tion was merely to mark a point by noting the hate of the
marvelous which rages in certain men, this absurdity be-
neath which they try to bury it. Let us not mince words:
the marvelous is always beautiful, anything marvelous is
beautiful, in fact only the marvelous is beautiful.

In the realm of literature, only the marvelous is capable
of fecundating works which belong to an inferior category
such as the novel, and generally speaking, anything that
involves storytelling, Lewis’ The Monk is an admirable
proof of this. It is infused throughout with the presence of

Manifesto of Surrealism — 15,

the marvelous. Long before the author has freed his main
characters from all temporal constraints, one feels them
ready to act with an unprecedented pride. This passion for
eternity with which they are constantly stirred lends an
unforgettable intensity to their torments, and to mine. T
mean that this book, from beginning to end, and in the
purest way imaginable, exercises an exalting effect only
upon that part of the mind which aspires to leave the earth
and that, stripped of an insignificant part of its plot, which
belongs to the period in which it was written, it consti-
tutes a paragon of precision and innocent grandeur.* It
seems to me none better has been done, and that the char-
acter of Mathilda in particular is the most moving creation
that one can credit to this figurative fashion in literature.
She is less a character than a continual temptation. And if
a character is not a temptation, what is he? An extreme
temptation, she. In The Monk, the “nothing is impossible
for him who dares try” gives it its full, convincing measure.
Ghosts play a logical role in the book, since the critical mind
does not seize them in order to dispute them. Ambrosio’s
punishment is likewise treated in a legitimate manner, since
it is finally accepted by the critical faculty as a natural de-
nouement.

It may seem arbitrary on my part, when discussing the
marvelous, to choose this model, from which both the
Nordic literatures and Oriental literatures have borrowed
time and time again, not to mention the religious litera-
tures of every country. This is because most of the examples
which these literatures could have furnished me with are
tainted by puerility, for the simple reason that they are
addressed to children. At an early age children are weaned
on the marvelous, and later on they fail to retain a sufficient
virginity of mind to thoroughly enjoy fairy tales, No matter

*What is admirable about the fantastic is that there is no
longer anything fantastic: there is only the real.


--- Page 8 ---
16 Manifestoes of Surrealism

how charming they may be, a grown man would think he
were reverting to childhood by nourishing himself on fairy
tales, and J am the first to admit that all such tales are not
suitable for him, The fabric of adorable improbabilities
must be made a trifle more subtle the older we grow, and
we are still at the stage of waiting for this kind of spider... .
But the faculties do not change radically. Fear, the attrac-
tion of the unusual, chance, the taste for things extravagant
are all devices which we can always call upon without fear
of deception. There are fairy tales to be written for adults,
fairy tales still almost blue.

The marvelous is not the same in every period of history: it
partakes in some obscure way of a sort of general revelation
only the fragments of which come down to us: they are
the romantic ruins, the modern mannequin, or any other
symbol capable of affecting the human sensibility for a
period of time. In these areas which make us smile, there
is still portrayed the incurable human restlessness, and this
is why I take them into consideration and why I judge them
inseparable from certain productions of genius which are,
more than the others, painfully afflicted by them. They are
Villon’s gibbets, Racine's Greeks, Baudelaire’s couches.
They coincide with an eclipse of the taste 1 am made to
endure, I whose notion of taste is the image of a big spot.
Amid the bad taste of my time I strive to go further than
anyone else. It would have been J, had I lived in 1820, I
“the bleeding nun,” I who would not have spared this
cunning and banal “let us conceal” whereof the parodical
Cuisin speaks, it would have been I, I who would have rev-
eled in the enormous metaphors, as he says, all phases of
the “silver disk.” For today I think of a castle, half of which
is not necessarily in ruins; this castle belongs to me, I pic-
ture it in a rustic setting, not far from Paris. The outbuild-
ings are too numerous to mention, and, as for the interior,
ithas been frightfully restored, in such a manner as to leave

Manifesto of Surrealism = 17

nothing to be desired from the viewpoint of comfort. Au-
tomobiles are parked before the door, concealed by the
shade of the trees. A few of my friends are living here as
permanent guests: there is Louis Aragon leaving; he only
has time enough to say hello; Philippe Soupault gets up
with the stars, and Paul Eluard, our great Eluard, has not
yet come home. There are Robert Desnos and Roger Vitrac
out on the grounds poring over an ancient edict on duel-
ing; Georges Auric, Jean Paulhan; Max Morise, who rows
so well, and Benjamin Péret, busy with his equations with
birds; and Joseph Delteil; and Jean Carrive; and Georges
Limbour, and Georges Limbours (there is a whole hedge
of Georges Limbours); and Marcel Noll; there is T. Fraen-
kel waving to us from his captive balloon, Georges Malkine,
Antonin Artaud, Francis Gérard, Pierre Naville, J.-A. Boif-
fard, and after them Jacques Baron and his brother, hand-
some and cordial, and so many others besides, and gorgeous
women, I might add. Nothing is too good for these young
men, their wishes are, as to wealth, so many commands,
Francis Picabia comes to pay us a call, and last week, in
the hall of mirrors, we received a certain Marcel Duchamp
whom we had not hitherto known. Picasso goes hunting in
the neighborhood. The spirit of demoralization has elected
domicile in the castle, and it is with it we have to deal every
time it is a question of contact with our fellowmen, but
the doors are always open, and one does not begin by
“thanking” everyone, you know. Moreover, the solitude is
vast, we don’t often run into one another. And anyway,
isn’t what matters that we be the masters of ourselves, the
masters of women, and of love too?

I shall be proved guilty of poetic dishonesty: everyone
will go parading about saying that I live on the rue Fon-
taine* and that he will have none of the water that flows
therefrom. To be sure! But is he certain that this castle

*Breton’s pun eludes translation: Fontaine=Fountain.—Tr.


--- Page 9 ---
18 — Manifestoes of Surrealism

into which I cordially invite him is an image? What if this
castle really existed! My guests are there to prove it does;
their whim is the luminous road that leads to it. We really
live by our fantasies when we give free rein to them. And
how could what one might do bother the other, there,
safely sheltered from the sentimental pursuit and at the
trysting place of opportunities?

Man proposes and disposes. He and he alone can determine
whether he is completely master of himself, that is, whether
he maintains the body of his desires, daily more formida-
ble, in a state of anarchy. Poetry teaches him to. It bears
within itself the perfect compensation for the miseries we
endure, It can also be an organizer, if ever, as the result of
a less intimate disappointment, we contemplate taking it
seriously. The time is coming when it decrees the end of
money and by itself will break the bread of heaven for the
earth! There will still be gatherings on the public squares,
and movements you never dared hope participate in. Fare-
well to absurd choices, the dreams of dark abyss, rivalries,
the prolonged patience, the flight of the seasons, the artifi-
cial order of ideas, the ramp of danger, time for every-
thing! May you only take the trouble to practice poetry. Is
it not incumbent upon us, who are already living off it, to
try and impose what we hold to be our case for further in-
quiry?

It matters not whether there is a certain disproportion
between this defense and the illustration that will follow
it. It was a question of going back to the sources of poetic
imagination and, what is more, of remaining there. Not
that I pretend to have done so. It requires a great deal of
fortitude to try to set up one’s abode in these distant regions
where everything seems at first to be so awkward and diffi-
cult, all the more so if one wants to try to take someone

i

Manifesto of Surrealism 19

there. Besides, one is never sure of really being there, If
one is going to all that trouble, one might just as well stop
off somewhere else. Be that as it may, the fact is that the
way to these regions is clearly marked, and that to attain
the true goal is now merely a matter of the travelers’ ability
to endure.

We are all more or less aware of the road traveled. I was
careful to relate, in the course of a study of the case of
Robert Desnos entitled ENTREE p¥s MEDIUMS,* that I had
been led to “concentrate my attention on the more or less
partial sentences which, when one is quite alone and on
the verge of falling asleep, become perceptible for the mind
without its being possible to discover what provoked
them.” I had then just attempted the poetic adventure with
the minimum of risks, that is, my aspirations were the same
as they are today but I trusted in the slowness of formula-
tion to keep me from useless contacts, contacts of which I
completely disapproved. This attitude involved a modesty
of thought certain vestiges of which I still retain. At the
end of my life, I shall doubtless manage to speak with great
effort the way people speak, to apologize for my voice and
my few remaining gestures. The virtue of the spoken word
(and the written word all the more so) seemed to me to
derive from the faculty of foreshortening in a striking
manner the exposition (since there was exposition) of a
small number of facts, poetic or other, of which I made
myself the substance. I had come to the conclusion that
Rimbaud had not proceeded any differently. I was compos-
ing, with a concern for variety that deserved better, the
final poems of Mont de piété, that is, | managed to extract
from the blank lines of this book an incredible advantage.
These lines were the closed eye to the operations of thought

*See Les Pas perdus, published by N.R. F.


--- Page 10 ---
20 Manifestoes of Surrealism

that I believed I was obliged to keep hidden from the
reader. It was not deceit on my part, but my love of shock-
ing the reader. I had the illusion of a possible complicity,
which I had more and more difficulty giving up. I had be-
gun to cherish words excessively for the space they allow
around them, for their tangencies with countless other
words that I did not utter. The poem eLack Forest derives
precisely from this state of mind. It took me six months to
write it, and you may take my word for it that I did not rest
a single day. But this stemmed from the opinion I had of
myself in those days, which was high, please don’t judge
me too harshly. I enjoy these stupid confessions. At that
point cubist pseudo-poetry was trying to get a foothold, but
it had emerged defenseless from Picasso's brain, and 1
was thought to be as dull as dishwater (and still am). I had a
sneaking suspicion, moreover, that from the viewpoint of
poetry I was off on the wrong road, but I hedged my bet as
best I could, defying lyricism with salvos of definitions and
formulas (the Dada phenomena were waiting in the wings,
ready to come on stage) and pretending to search for an
application of poetry to advertising (I went so far as to
claim that the world would end, not with a good book but
with a beautiful advertisement for heaven or for hell).

In those days, a man at least as boring as I, Pierre
Reverdy, was writing:

The image is a pure creation of the mind.

It cannot be born from a comparison but from a jux-
taposition of two more or less distant realities,

The more the relationship between the two quxta-
posed realities is distant and true, the stronger the image
will be-the greater its emotional power and poetic
reality ...*

These words, however sibylline for the uninitiated,
were extremely revealing, and I pondered them for a long

*Nord-Sud, March 1918,

ste eae

Manifesto of Surrealism = — 21

time. But the image eluded me. Reverdy’s aesthetic, a
completely a posteriori aesthetic, led me to mistake the ef-
fects for the causes. It was in the midst of all this that I re-
nounced irrevocably my point of view.

One evening, therefore, before I fell asleep, I perceived, so
clearly articulated that it was impossible to change a word,
but nonetheless removed from the sound of any voice, a
rather strange phrase which came to me without any ap-
parent relationship to the events in which, my conscious-
ness agrees, I was then involved, a phrase which seemed to
me insistent, a phrase, if I may be so bold, which was knock-
ing at the window. I took cursory note of it and prepared
to move on when its organic character caught my attention.
Actually, this phrase astonished me: unfortunately I cannot
remember it exactly, but it was something like: “There is
a man cut in two by the window,” but there could be no
question of ambiguity, accompanied as it was by the faint
visual image* of a man walking cut half way up by a

*Were I a painter, this visual depiction would doubtless have
become more important for me than the other. It was most certainly
my previous predispositions which decided the matter. Since that day,
Thave had occasion to concentrate my attention voluntarily on sim-
ilar apparitions, and [ know that they are fully as clear as auditory
phenomena. With a pencil and white sheet of paper to hand, I could
easily trace their outlines. Here again it is not a matter of drawing,
but simply of tracing. I could thus depict a tree, a wave, a musical in-
sttument, all manner of things of which I am presently incapable of
providing even the roughest sketch, I would plunge into it, convinced
that I would find my way again, in a maze of lines which at first
glance would seem to be going nowhere. And, upon opening my
eyes, I would get the very strong impression of something “never
seen.” The proof of what I am saying has been provided many times
by Robert Desnos; to be convinced, one has only to leaf through the
pages of issue number 36 of Feuilles libres which contains several of
his drawings (Romeo and Juliet, A Man Died This Morning, etc.)
which were taken by this magazine as the drawings of a madman and
published as such.



--- Page 11 ---
22 Manifestoes of Surrealism

window perpendicular to the axis of his body. Beyond the
slightest shadow of a doubt, what I saw was the simple re-
construction in space of a man leaning out a window. But
this window having shifted with the man, I realized that I
was dealing with an image of a fairly rare sort, and all I
could think of was to incorporate it into my material for
poetic construction, No sooner had I granted it this capac-
ity than it was in fact succeeded by a whole series of
phrases, with only brief pauses between them, which sur-
prised me only slightly less and left me with the impression
of their being so gratuitous that the control I had then ex-
ercised upon myself seemed to me illusory and all I could
think of was putting an end to the interminable quarrel
Taging within me.*

Completely occupied as I still was with Freud at that time,
and familiar as I was with his methods of examination
which I had had some slight occasion to use on some pa-
tients during the war, I resolved to obtain from myself what

*Knut Hamsum ascribes this sort of revelation to which I had
been subjected as deriving from hunger, and he may not be wrong.
(The fact is I did not eat every day during that period of my life)
Most certainly the manifestations that he describes in these terms
are clearly the same:

“The following day I awoke at an early hour. It was still dark.
My eyes had been open for a long time when I heard the clock in
the apartment above strike five. I wanted to go back to sleep, but I
couldn't; I was wide awake and a thousand thoughts were crowding
through my mind.

“Suddenly a few good fragments came to mind, quite suitable
to be used in a rough draft, or serialized; all of a sudden I found,
quite by chance, beautiful phrases, phrases such as I had never
written, I repeated them to myself slowly, word by word; they
were excellent. And there were still more coming. I got up and
picked up a pencil and some paper that were on a table behind my
bed. It was as though some vein had burst within me, one word fol-
lowed another, found its proper place, adapted itself to the situation,

Manifesto of Surrealism 2g

we were trying to obtain from them, namely, a monologue
spoken as rapidly as possible without any intervention on
the part of the critical faculties, a monologue consequently
unencumbered by the slightest inhibition and which was,
as closely as possible, akin to spoken thought. It had seemed
to me, and still does—the way in which the phrase about
the man cut in two had come to me is an indication of it—
that the speed of thought is no greater than the speed of
speech, and that thought does not necessarily defy language,
nor even the fast-moving pen. It was in this frame of mind
that Philippe Soupault—to whom I had confided these ini-
tial conclusions—and I decided to blacken some paper, with
a praiseworthy disdain for what might result from a liter-
ary point of view. The ease of execution did the rest. By
the end of the first day we were able to read to ourselves
some fifty or so pages obtained in this manner, and begin
to compare our results, All in all, Soupault’s pages and
mine proved to be remarkably similar: the same overcon-
struction, shortcomings of a similar nature, but also, on
both our parts, the illusion of an extraordinary verve, a
great deal of emotion, a considerable choice of images of a
quality such that we would not have been capable of prepar-
ing a single one in longhand, a very special picturesque
quality and, here and there, a strong comical effect. The
only difference between our two texts seemed to me to de-
rive essentially from our respective tempers, Soupault’s
being less static than mine, and, if he does not mind my

scene piled upon scene, the action unfolded, one retort after another
welled up in my mind, I was enjoying myself immensely. Thoughts
came to me so rapidly and continued to flow so abundantly that J lost
a whole host of delicate details, because my pencil could not keep up
with them, and yet I went as fast as I could, my hand in constant
motion, I did not lose a minute. The sentences continued to well up
within me, I was pregnant with my subject.”

Apollinaire asserted that Chirico’s first paintings were done
under the influence of cenesthesic disorders (migraines, colics, etc.).


--- Page 12 ---
24 Manifestoes of Surrealism

offering this one slight criticism, from the fact that he had
made the error of putting a few words by way of titles at
the top of certain pages, I suppose in a spirit of mystifica-
tion. On the other hand, I must give credit where credit is
due and say that he constantly and vigorously opposed any
effort to retouch or correct, however slightly, any passage
of this kind which seemed to me unfortunate, In this he
was, to be sure, absolutely right.* It is, in fact, difficult to
appreciate fairly the various elements present; one may
even go so far as to say that it is impossible to appreciate
them at a first reading. To you who write, these elements
are, on the surface, as strange to you as they are to anyone
else, and naturally you are wary of them. Poetically speak-
ing, what strikes you about them above all is their extreme
degree of immediate absurdity, the quality of this absurd-
ity, upon closer scrutiny, being to give way to everything
admissible, everything legitimate in the world: the dis-
closure of a certain number of properties and of facts no
less objective, in the final analysis, than the others.

In homage to Guillaume Apollinaire, who had just
died and who, on several occasions, seemed to us to have
followed a discipline of this kind, without however having
sacrificed to it any mediocre literary means, Soupault and J
baptized the new mode of pure expression which we had
at our disposal and which we wished to pass on to. our
friends, by the name of surrEatisM. I believe that there is
no point today in dwelling any further on this word and
that the meaning we gave it initially has generally prevailed
over its Apollinarian sense. To be even fairer, we could

*I believe more and more in the infallibility of my thought
with respect to myself, and this is too fair. Nonetheless, with this
thought-writing, where one is at the mercy of the first outside distrac-
Hon, “ebullutions” can occur, It would be inexcusable for us to pre-
tend otherwise, By definition, thought is strong, and incapable of

catching itself in error, The blame for these obvious weaknesses must
be placed on suggestions that come to it from without,

i

Manifesto of Surrealism — 25,

probably have taken over the word sUPERNATURALISM em-
ployed by Gérard de Nerval in his dedication to the Filles
de feu.* It appears, in fact, that Nerval possessed to a tee
the spirit with which we claim a kinship, Apollinaire hav-
ing possessed, on the contrary, naught but the letter, still
imperfect, of Surrealism, having shown himself powerless
to give a valid theoretical idea of it. Here are two passages
by Nerval which seem to me to be extremely significant in
this respect:

1 am going to explain to you, my dear Dumas,
the phenomenon of which you have spoken a short
while ago, There are, as you know, certain storytellers
who cannot invent without identifying with the char-
acters their imagination has dreamt up. You may recall
how convincingly our old friend Nodier used to tell
how it had been his misfortune during the Revolution
to be guillotined; one became so completely convinced
of what he was saying that one began to wonder how he
had managed to have his head glued back on.

... And since you have been indiscreet enough
to quote one of the sonnets composed in this suPER-
NATURALISTIC dream-state, as the Germans would call
it, you will have to hear them all. You will find them at
the end of the volume. They are hardly any more
obscure than Hegel’s metaphysics or Swedenborg’s
MEMORABILIA, and would lose their charm if they were
explained, if such were possible; at least admit the
worth of the expression... .**

Those who might dispute our right to employ the term
SURREALISM in the very special sense that we understand it
are being extremely dishonest, for there can be no doubt

*And also by Thomas Carlyle in Sartor Resartus ((Book IIT]
Chapter VEU, “Natural Supernaturalism”), 1833-34.
#*See also L’Idéoréalisme by Saint-Pol-Roux.


--- Page 13 ---
26 Manifestoes of Surrealism

that this word had no currency before we came along.
Therefore, I am defining it once and for all:

SURREALISM, 1. Psychic automatism in its pure state,
by which one proposes to express—verbally, by means of
the written word, or in any other manner—the actual func-
tioning of thought. Dictated by thought, in the absence of
any control exercised by reason, exempt from any aesthetic
or moral concern.

ENCYCLOPEDIA. Philosophy. Surrealism is based on the
belief in the superior reality of certain forms of previously
neglected associations, in the omnipotence of dream, in
the disinterested play of thought. It tends to ruin once and
for all all other psychic mechanisms and to substitute itself
for them in solving all the principal problems of life. The
following have performed acts of ABSOLUTE SURREALISM:
Messrs. Aragon, Baron, Boiffard, Breton, Carrive, Crevel,
Delteil, Desnos, Eluard, Gérard, Limbour, Malkine,
Morise, Naville, Noll, Péret, Picon, Soupault, Vitrac.

They seem to be, up to the present time, the only ones, and
there would be no ambiguity about it were it not for the
case of Isidore Ducasse, about whom I lack information.
And, of course, if one is to judge them only superficially by
their results, a good number of poets could pass for Surreal-
ists, beginning with Dante and, in his finer moments, Shake-
speare. In the course of the various attempts I have made to
reduce what is, by breach of trust, called genius, I have
found nothing which in the final analysis can be attributed
toany other method than that.

Young's Nights are Surrealist from one end to the other;
unfortunately it is a priest who is speaking, a bad priest no
doubt, but a priest nonetheless.

Swift is Surrealist in malice,
Sade is Surrealist in sadism.

Manifesto of Surrealism 27

Chateaubriand is Surrealist in exoticism.
Constant is Surrealist in politics.

Hugo is Surrealist when he isn’t stupid.
Desbordes-Valmore is Surrealist in love.
Bertrand is Surrealist in the past.

Rabbe is Surrealist in death.

Poe is Surrealist in adveriture.

Baudelaire is Surrealist in morality.

Rimbaud is Surrealist in the way he lived, and elsewhere,
Mallarmé is Surrealist when he is confiding.
Jarry is Surrealist in absinthe.

Nouveau is Surrealist in the kiss.

Saint Pol-Roux is Surrealist in his use of symbols.
Fargue is Surrealist in the atmosphere.

Vaché is Surrealist in me.

Reverdy is Surrealist at home.

Saint-Jean-Perse is Surrealist at a distance.
Roussel is Surrealist as a storyteller.

Etc.

I would like to stress this point: they are not always Sur-
realists, in that I discern in each of them a certain number
of preconceived ideas to which—very naively!—they hold.
They hold to them because they had not heard the Surreal.
ist voice, the one that continues to preach on the eve of
death and above the storms, because they did not want to
serve simply to orchestrate the marvelous score. They were
instruments too full of pride, and this is why they have
not always produced a harmonious sound.*

But we, who have made no effort whatsoever to filter,
who in our works have made ourselves into simple recep-

*{ could say the same of a number of philosophers and painters,
including, among these latter, Urcello, from painters of the past, and,
in the modern era, Scurat, Gustave Moreau, Matisse (in “La Mus-
ique,” for example). Derain, Picasso, (by far the most pure), Braque,
Duchamp, Picabia, Chirico (so admirable for so long), Klee, Man Ray,
Max Ernst, and, one so close to us, André Masson,


--- Page 14 ---
28 Manifestoes of Surrealism

tacles of so many echoes, modest recording instruments who
are not mesmerized by the drawings we are making, per-
haps we serve an even nobler cause, Thus do we render with
integrity the “talent” which has been lent to us, You might
as well speak of the talent of this platinum ruler, this mir-
tor, this door, and of the sky, if you like.

We do not have any talent; ask Philippe Soupault:

“Anatomical products of manufacture and low-income
dwellings will destroy the tallest cities.”

Ask Roger Vitrac:

“No sooner had I called forth the marble-admiral than
he turned on his heel like a horse which rears at the sight
of the North star and showed me, in the plane of his two-
pointed cocked hat, a region where I was to spend my
life.”

Ask Paul Eluard:

“This is an oft-told tale that J tell, a famous poem that
I reread: Lam leaning against @ wall, with my verdant ears
and my lips burned to a crisp.”

Ask Max Morise:

“The bear of the caves and his friend the bittern, the
vol-au-vent and his valet the wind, the Lord Chancellor
with his Lady, the scarecrow for sparrows and his accom.
plice the sparrow, the test tube and his daughter the
needle, this carnivore and his brother the carnival, the
sweeper and his monocle, the Mississippi and its little dog,
the coral and its jug of milk, the Miracle and its Good
Lord, might just as well go and disappear from the surface
of the sea.”

Ask Joseph Delteil;

“Alas! I believe in the virtue of birds. And a feather
isall it takes to make me die laughing.”

Ask Louis Aragon:

“During a short break in the party, as the players were

+

Manifesto of Surrealism 29

gathering around a bowl of flaming punch, 1 asked the tree
if it still had its red ribbon.”

And ask me, who was unable to keep myself from
writing the serpentine, distracting lines of this preface.

Ask Robert Desnos, he who, more than any of us, has
perhaps got closest to the Surrealist truth, he who, in his
still unpublished works* and in the course of the numer.
ous experiments he has been a party to, has fully justified
the hope I placed in Surrealism and leads me to believe
that a great deal more will still come of it. Desnos speaks
Surrealist at will. His extraordinary agility in orally fol-
lowing his thought is worth as much to us as any number of
splendid speeches which are lost, Desnos having better
things to do than record them. He reads himself like an
open book, and does nothing to retain the pages, which fly
away in the windy wake of his life,

SECRETS OF THE MAGICAL
SURREALIST ART

Written Surrealist composition
or
first and last draft

After you have settled yourself in a place as favorable as
possible to the concentration of your mind upon itself, have
writing materials brought to you. Put yourself in as passive,
or receptive, a state of mind as you can. Forget about your
genius, your talents, and the talents of everyone else. Keep
reminding yourself that literature is one of the saddest
roads that leads to everything. Write quickly, without any
preconceived subject, fast enough so that you will not re-

*Nouvettes Hésriprs, Désorpre For Mer, DEUIL. POUR DEUIL.


--- Page 15 ---
30 Manifestoes of Surrealism

member what you're writing and be tempted to reread
what you have written. The first sentence will come spon.
taneously, so compelling is the truth that with every passing
second there is a sentence unknown to our conscious-
ness which is only crying out to be heard, It is somewhat of
a problem to form an opinion about the next sentence; it
doubtless partakes both of our conscious activity and of the
other, if one agrees that the fact of having written the first
entails a minimum of perception. This should be of no
importance to you, however; to a large extent, this is what
is most interesting and intriguing about the Surrealist
game. The fact still remains that punctuation no doubt
Tesists the absolute continuity of the flow with which we are
concerned, although it may seem as necessary as the ar-
rangement of knots in a vibrating cord. Go on as long as
you like. Put your trust in the inexhaustible nature of the
murmur. If silence threatens to settle in if you should
ever happen to make a mistake—a mistake, perhaps due to
carelessness—break off without hesitation with an overly
clear line, Following a word the origin of which seems sus-
picious to you, place any letter whatsoever, the letter “{”
for example, always the letter “1,” and bring the arbitrary
back by making this letter the first of the following word.

How not to be bored any longer when with others

This is very difficult. Don’t be at home for anyone,
and occasionally, when no one has forced his way in, in-
terrupting you in the midst of your Surrealist activity, and
you, crossing your arms, say: “It doesn't matter, there are
doubtless better things to do or not do. Interest in life is
indefensible, Simplicity, what is going on inside me, is still
tiresome to me!” or any other revolting banality.

To make speeches

Just prior to the elections, in the first country which deems

Manifesto of Surrealism 31

it worthwhile to proceed in this kind of public expression
of opinion, have yourself put on the ballot. Each of us has
within himself the potential of an orator: multicolored
loin cloths, glass trinkets of words. Through Surrealism
he will take despair unawares in its poverty. One night, on
a stage, he will, by himself, carve up the eternal heaven,
that Peau de lours. He will promise so much that any
promises he keeps will be a source of wonder and dismay.
In answer to the claims of an entire people he will give a
partial and ludicrous vote. He will make the bitterest en-
emies partake of a secret desire which will blow up the
countries. And in this he will succeed simply by allowing
himself to be moved by the immense word which dissolves
into pity and revolves in hate. Incapable of failure, he will
play on the velvet of all failures. He will be truly elected,
and women will love him with an all-consuming passion.

To write false novels

Whoever you may be, if the spirit moves you burn a few
laurel leaves and, without wishing to tend this meager fire,
you will begin to write a novel. Surrealism will allow you
to: all you have to do is set the needle marked “fair” at “ac-
tion,” and the rest will follow naturally, Here are some
characters rather different in appearance; their names in
your handwriting are a question of capital letters, and they
will conduct themselves with the same ease with respect to

active verbs as does the impersonal pronoun “it” with re-
spect to words such as “is raining,” “is,” “must,” etc. They
will command them, so to speak, and wherever observa-
tion, reflection, and the faculty of generalization prove to
be of no help to you, you may rest assured that they will
credit you with a thousand intentions you never had. Thus
endowed with a tiny number of physical and moral charac-
teristics, these beings who in truth owe you so little will
thereafter deviate not one iota from a certain line of con-
duct about which you need not concern yourself any fur-


--- Page 16 ---
32 Manifestoes of Surrealism

ther. Out of this will result a plot more or less clever in
appearance, justifying point by point this moving or com-
forting denouement about which you couldn't care less.
Your false novel will simulate to a marvelous degree a real
novel; you will be rich, and everyone will agree that
“you've really got a lot of guts,” since it’s also in this region
that this something is located.

Of course, by an analogous method, and provided you
ignore what you are reviewing, you can successfully devote
yourself to false literary criticism.

How to catch the eye of a woman
you pass in the street

Against death

Surrealism will usher you into death, which is a secret so-
ciety. It will glove your hand, burying therein the pro-
found M with which the word Memory begins. Do not
forget to make proper arrangements for your last will and
testament: speaking personally, I ask that I be taken to
the cemetery in a moving van. May my friends destroy
every last copy of the printing of the Speech concerning the
Modicum of Reality.

Language has been given to man so that he may make
Surrealist use of it. To the extent that he is required to
make himself understood, he manages more or less to ex-
press himself, and by so doing to fulfill certain functions

Manifesto of Surrealism 33,

culled from among the most vulgar. Speaking, reading a
letter, present no real problem for him, provided that, in
so doing, he does not set himself a goal above the mean,
that is, provided he confines himself to carrying on a con-
versation (for the pleasure of conversing) with someone.
He is not worried about the words that are going to come,
nor about the sentence which will follow after the sentence
he is just completing, To a very simple question, he will be
capable of making a lightning-like reply. In the absence
of minor tics acquired through contact with others, he
can without any ado offer an opinion on a limited number
of subjects; for that he does not need to “count up to ten”
before speaking or to formulate anything whatever ahead
of time. Who has been able to convince him that this
faculty of the first draft will only do him a disservice when
he makes up his mind to establish more delicate relation-
ships? There is no subject about which he should refuse
to talk, to write about prolifically. All that results from
listening to oneself, from reading what one has written, is
the suspension of the occult, that admirable help. 1 am
in no hurry to understand myself (basta! I shall always
understand myself), If such and such a sentence of mine
turns out to be somewhat disappointing, at least momen-
tarily, I place my trust in the following sentence to redeem
its sins: I carefully refrain from starting it over again or
polishing it. The only thing that might prove fatal to me
would be the slightest loss of impetus. Words, groups of
words which follow one another, manifest among them-
selves the greatest solidarity. It is not up to me to favor
one group over the other. It is up to a miraculous equiva-
lent to intervene—and intervene it does.

Not only does this unrestricted language, which I am
trying to render forever valid, which seems to me to adapt
itself to all of life’s circumstances, not only does this lan-
guage not deprive me of any of my means, on the contrary
it lends me an extraordinary lucidity, and it does so in an
area where I least expected it. I shall even go so far as to


--- Page 17 ---
34 Manifestoes of Surrealism

maintain that it instructs me and, indeed, I have had oc-
casion to use surreally words whose meaning I have for-
gotten. I was subsequently able to verify that the way in
which I had used them corresponded perfectly with their
definition. This would lead one to believe that we do not
“learn,” that all we ever do is “relearn.” There are felici-
tous turns of speech that I have thus familiarized myself
with. And I am not talking about the poetic consciousness
of objects which I have been able to acquire only after a
spiritual contact with them repeated a thousand times over.

The forms of Surrealist language adapt themselves best to
dialogue. Here, two thoughts confront each other; while
one is being delivered, the other is busy with it; but how
is it busy with it? To assume that it incorporates it within
itself would be tantamount to admitting that there is a
time during which it is possible for it to live completely off
that other thought, which is highly unlikely. And, in fact,
the attention it pays is completely exterior; it has only time
enough to approve or reject—generally reject—with all the
consideration of which man is capable. This mode of lan-
guage, moreover, does not allow the heart of the matter to
be plumbed. My attention, prey to an entreaty which it
cannot in all decency reject, treats the opposing thought
as an enemy; in ordinary conversation, it “takes it up” al-
most always on the words, the figures of speech, it employs;
it puts me in a position to turn it to good advantage in my
reply by distorting them, This is true to such a degree that
in certain pathological states of mind, where the sensorial
disorders occupy the patient's complete attention, he limits
himself, while continuing to answer the questions, to seiz-
ing the last word spoken in his presence or the last portion
of the Surrealist sentence some trace of which he finds in
his mind.

Q. “How oldare you?” a. “You.” (Echolalia.)
Q. “What is your name?” a. “Forty-five houses.” (Ganser
syndrome, or beside-the-point replies.)

Manifesto of Surrealism 35,

There is no conversation in which some trace of this
disorder does not occur. The effort to be social which dic-
tates it and the considerable practice we have at it are the
only things which enable us to conceal it temporarily. It
is also the great weakness of the book that it is in constant
conflict with its best, by which I mean the most demanding,
readers, In the very short dialogue that I concocted above
between the doctor and the madman, it was in fact the
madman who got the better of the exchange. Because,
through his replies, he obtrudes upon the attention of the
doctor examining him—and because he is not the person
asking the questions. Does this mean that his thought at
this point is the stronger? Perhaps. He is free not to care
any longer about his age or name.

Poetic Surrealism, which is the subject of this study,
has focused its efforts up to this point on reestablishing dia-
logue in its absolute truth, by freeing both interlocutors
from any obligations of politeness. Each of them simply
pursues his soliloquy without trying to derive any special
dialectical pleasure from it and without trying to impose
anything whatsoever upon his neighbor. The remarks ex-
changed are not, as is generally the case, meant to develop
some thesis, however unimportant it may be; they are as
disaffected as possible. As for the reply that they elicit, it is,
in principle, totally indifferent to the personal pride of the
person speaking. The words, the images are only so many
springboards for the mind of the listener. In Les Champs
magnétiques, the first purely Surrealist work, this is the
way in which the pages grouped together under the title
Barriéres must be conceived of—pages wherein Soupault
and I show ourselves to be impartial interlocutors.

Surrealism does not allow those who devote themselves to
it to forsake it whenever they like. There is every reason


--- Page 18 ---
36 — Manifestoes of Surrealism

to believe that it acts on the mind very much as drugs do;
like drugs, it creates a certain state of need and can push
man to frightful revolts, It also is, if you like, an artificial
paradise, and the taste one has for it derives from Bau-
delaire’s criticism for the same reason as the others. Thus
the analysis of the mysterious effects and special pleasures it
can produce—in many respects Surrealism occurs as a new
vice which does not necessarily seem to be restricted to the
appy few; like hashish, it has the ability to satisfy all man-
ner of tastes—such an analysis has to be included in the
resent study,

1, It is true of Surrealist images as it is of opium
images that man does not evoke them; rather they “come to
im spontaneously, despotically. He cannot chase them
away; for the will is powerless now and no longer controls
the faculties.”* It remains to be seen whether images have
ever been “evoked.” If one accepts, as I do, Reverdy’s
definition it does not seem possible to bring together, vol-
untarily, what he calls “two distant realities.” The juxta-
position is made or not made, and that is the long and the
short of it. Personally, I absolutely refuse to believe that, in
Reverdy’s work, images such as

In the brook, there is a song that flows
or:

Day unfolded like a white tablecloth
or:

The world goes back into a sack

reveal the slightest degree of premeditation. In my opinion,
it is erroneous to claim that “the mind has grasped the re-
lationship” of two realities in the presence of each other.

*Baudelaire,

Manifesto of Surrealism 37

First of all, it has seized nothing consciously. It is, as it
were, from the fortuitous juxtaposition of the two terms
that a particular light has sprung, the light of the image, to
which we are infinitely sensitive. The value of the image
depends upon the beauty of the spark obtained; it is, con-
sequently, a function of the difference of potential between
the two conductors. When the difference exists only
slightly, as in a comparison,* the spark is lacking. Now, it
is not within man’s power, so far as I can tell, to effect the
juxtaposition of two realities so far apart. The principle
of the association of ideas, such as we conceive of it, mili-
tates against it. Or else we would have to revert to an ellip-
tical art, which Reverdy deplores as much as I. We are
therefore obliged to admit that the two terms of the image
are not deduced one from the other by the mind for the
specific purpose of producing the spark, that they are the
simultaneous products of the activity I call Surrealist,
reason’s role being limited to taking note of, and appre-
ciating, the luminous phenomenon.

‘And just as the length of the spark increases to the
extent that it occurs in rarefied gases, the Surrealist atmo-
sphere created by automatic writing, which I have wanted
to put within the reach of everyone, is especially conducive
to the production of the most beautiful images. One can
even go so far as to say that in this dizzying race the images
appear like the only guideposts of the mind. By slow de-
grees the mind becomes convinced of the supreme reality
of these images. At first limiting itself to submitting to
them, it soon realizes that they flatter its reason, and in-
crease its knowledge accordingly. The mind becomes aware
of the limitless expanses wherein its desires are made mani-
fest, where the pros and cons are constantly consumed,
where its obscurity does not betray it. It goes forward,

Compare the image in the work of Jules Renard.


--- Page 19 ---
38 — Manifestoes of Surrealism

borne by these images which enrapture it, which scarcely
leave it any time to blow upon the fire in its fingers, This
is the most beautiful night of all, the lightning-filled night:
day, compared to it, is night.

‘The countless kinds of Surrealist images would require a
classification which I do not intend to make today. To
group them according to their particular affinities would
lead me far afield; what I basically want to mention is their
common virtue, For me, their greatest virtue, I must con-
fess, is the one that is arbitrary to the highest degree, the
one that takes the longest time to translate into practical
language, either because it contains an immense amount
of seeming contradiction or because one of its terms is
strangely concealed; or because, presenting itself as some-
thing sensational, it seems to end weakly (because it sud-
denly closes the angle of its compass), or because it derives
from itself a ridiculous formal justification, or because it is
of a hallucinatory kind, or because it very naturally gives
to the abstract the mask of the concrete, or the opposite, or
because it implies the negation of some elementary physi-
cal property, or because it provokes laughter. Here, in
order, are a few examples of it:

The ruby of champagne. (LAUTREAMONT)

Beautiful as the law of arrested development of the
breast in adults, whose propensity to growth is not in pro-
portion to the quantity of molecules that their organism
assimilates. (LAUTREAMONT)

A church stood dazzling as a bell. (PHILIPPE SoUPAULT)

In Rrose Sélavy's sleep there is a dwarf issued from a
well who comes to eat her bread at night. (ROBERT DESNOS)

On the bridge the dew with the head of a tabby cat
lulls itself to sleep. (ANDRE BRETON)

A little to the left, in my firmament foretold, I see—

Manifesto of Surrealism 39

but it’s doubtless but a mist of blood and murder—the
gleaming glass of liberty’s disturbances. (LOUIS ARAGON)

In the forest aflame
The lions were fresh. (ROBERT VITRAC)

The color of a woman’s stockings is not necessarily in
the likeness of her eyes, which led a philosopher who it is
pointless to mention, to say: “Cephalopods have more
reasons to hate progress than do quadrupeds.”

(MAX MORISE)

ist. Whether we like it or not, there is enough there
to satisfy several demands of the mind. All these images
seem to attest to the fact that the mind is ripe for some-
thing more than the benign joys it allows itself in general.
This is the only way it has of turning to its own advantage
the ideal quantity of events with which it is entrusted.*
These images show it the extent of its ordinary dissipation
and the drawbacks that it offers for it. In the final analysis,
it’s not such a bad thing for these images to upset the mind,
for to upset the mind is to put it in the wrong. The sen-
tences I quote make ample provision for this. But the mind
which relishes them draws therefrom the conviction that
it is on the right track; on its own, the mind is incapable
of finding itself guilty of cavil; it has nothing to fear, since,
moreover, it attempts to embrace everything.

and. The mind which plunges into Surrealism re-
lives with glowing excitement the best part of its childhood.
For such a mind, it is similar to the certainty with which
a person who is drowning reviews once more, in the space
of less than a second, all the insurmountable moments of

*Let us not forget that, according to Novalis’ formula, “there
are series of events which run parallel to real events. Men and cir-
‘cumstances generally modify the ideal train of circumstances, so that
it seems imperfect; and their consequences are also equally imperfect.
Thus it was with the Reformation; instead of Protestantism, we got
Lutheranism.”


--- Page 20 ---
40 Manifestoes of Surrealism

his life. Some may say to me that the parallel is not very
encouraging, But I have no intention of encouraging those
who tell me that. From childhood memories, and from a
few others, there emanates a sentiment of being uninte-
grated, and then later of having gone astray, which I hold
to be the most fertile that exists. It is perhaps childhood
that comes closest to one’s “real life”; childhood beyond
which man has at his disposal, aside from his laissez-passer,
only a few complimentary tickets; childhood where every-
thing nevertheless conspires to bring about the effective,
tisk-free possession of oneself, Thanks to Surrealism, it
seems that opportunity knocks a second time. It is as though
we were still running toward our salvation, or our perdi-
tion. In the shadow we again see a precious terror. Thank
God, it’s still only Purgatory. With a shudder, we cross
what the occultists call dangerous territory. In my wake I
raise up monsters that are lying in wait; they are not yet
too ill-disposed toward me, and I am not lost, since J fear
them. Here are “the elephants with the heads of women
and the flying lions” which used to make Soupault and me
tremble in our boots to meet, here is the “soluble fish”
which still frightens me slightly. soLuste risa, am I not
the soluble fish, I was born under the sign of Pisces, and
man is soluble in his thought! The flora and fauna of Sur-
realism are inadmissible,

3rd. I do not believe in the establishment of a conven-
tional Surrealist pattern any time in the near future, The
characteristics common to all the texts of this kind, includ-
ing those I have just cited and many others which alone
could offer us a logical analysis and a careful grammatical
analysis, do not preclude a certain evolution of Surrealist
prose in time, Coming on the heels of a large number of
essays I have written in this vein over the past five years,
most of which I am indulgent enough to think are ex-
tremely disordered, the short anecdotes which comprise

Manifesto of Surrealism 41

the balance of this volume offer me a glaring proof of what
I am saying. I do not judge them to be any more worth-
less, because of that, in portraying for the reader the bene-
fits which the Surrealist contribution is liable to make to
his consciousness.

Surrealist methods would, moreover, demand to be
heard. Everything is valid when it comes to obtaining the
desired suddenness from certain associations. The pieces
of paper that Picasso and Braque insert into their work
have the same value as the introduction of a platitude into
a literary analysis of the most rigorous sort. It is even
permissible to entitle pozm what we get from the most
random assemblage possible (observe, if you will, the syn-
tax) of headlines and scraps of headlines cut out of the
newspapers:

POEM

A burst of laughter
of sapphire in the island of Ceylon

The most beautifal straws

HAVE A FADED COLOR
UNDER THE LOCKS


--- Page 21 ---
42 Manifestoes of Surrealism i Manifesto of Surrealism 43

on an isolated farm : Watch out for
FROM DAY TO DAY the fire that covers
the pleasant THE PRAYER
grows worse of fair weather
A carriage road
takes you to the edge of the unknown Know that
' The ultraviolet rays
have finished their task
coffee : short and sweet
preaches for its saint t
THE DAILY aa BEAUTY i THE FIRST WHITE PAPER
M OF CHANCE
Red will be
a pair
of silk stockings
POUR The wandering singer
WHERE IS HE?
M4 in memor.
A leap into space are
A STAG AT THE SUITORS’ BALL
Love above all I do
Everything could be worked out so well as I dance

PARIS IS A BIG VILLAGE What people did, what they’re going to do


--- Page 22 ---
44 Manifestoes of Surrealism

And we could offer many many more examples. The
theater, philosophy, science, criticism would all succeed in
finding their bearings there, I hasten to add that future
Surrealist techniques do not interest me.

Far more serious, in my opinion*~I have intimated
it often enough—are the applications of Surrealism to
action. To be sure, I do not believe in the prophetic na-
ture of the Surrealist word. “It is the oracle, the things I

*Whatever reservations I may be allowed to make concerning
responsibility in general and the medico-legal considerations which
determine an individual's degree of responsibility—complete respon-
sibility, irresponsibility, limited responsibility (sic)~however difficult
it may Le for me to accept the principle of any kind of responsibility,
I would like to know how the first punishable offenses, the Surrealist
character of which will be clearly apparent, will be judged. Will the
accused be acquitted, or will he merely be given the benefit of the
doubt because of extenuating circumstances? It's a shame that the
violation of the laws governing the Press is today scarcely repressed,
for if it were not we would soon see a trial of this sort: the accused
has published a book which is an outrage to public decency. Several
of his “most respected and honorable” fellow citizens have lodged a
complaint against him, and he is also charged with slander and libel.
‘There are also all sorts of other charges against him, such as insulting
and defaming the army, inciting to murder, rape, etc. The accused,
moreover, wastes no time in agreeing with the accusers in “stigmatiz-
ing” most of the ideas expressed. His only defense is claiming that he
does not consider himself to be the author of his book, said book
being no more and no less than a Surrealist concoction which pre-
cludes any question of merit or lack of merit on the part of the
person who signs it; further, that all he has done is copy a document
without offering any opinion thereon, and that he is at least as for-
eign to the accused text as is the presiding judge himself.

‘What is true for the publication of a book will also hold true
for a whole host of other acts as soon as Surrealist methods begin to
enjoy widespread favor. When that happens, a new morality must
be substituted for the prevailing morality, the source of all our trials
and tribulations.

Manifesto of Surrealism 45,

say.”* Yes, as much as I like, but what of the oracle it-
self?** Men’s piety does not fool me. The Surrealist voice
that shook Cumae, Dodona, and Delphi is nothing more
than the voice which dictates my less irascible speeches to
me. My time must not be its time, why should this voice
help me resolve the childish problem of my destiny? I
pretend, unfortunately, to act in a world where, in order
to take into account its suggestions, I would be obliged to
resort to two kinds of interpreters, one to translate its
judgments for me, the other, impossible to find, to trans-
mit to my fellow men whatever sense I could make out of
them. This world, in which I endure what I endure (don’t
go see) this modern world, I mean, what the devil do you
want me to do with it? Perhaps the Surrealist voice will be
stilled, I have given up trying to keep track of those who
have disappeared. I shall no longer enter into, however
briefly, the marvelous detailed description of my years
and my days. I shall be like Nijinski who was taken last
year to the Russian ballet and did not realize what spec-

*Rimbaud.

**Still, sTILL. ... We must absolutely get to the bottom of this.
Today, June 8, 1924, about one o'clock, the voice whispered to me:
“Béthune, Béthune.” What did it mean? | have never been to
Béthune, and have only the vaguest notion as to where it is located
on the map of France, Béthune evokes nothing for me, not even a
scene from The Three Musketeers. | should have left for Béthune,
where perhaps there was something awaiting me; that would have
been too simple, really. Someone told me they had read in a book by
Chesterton about a detective who, in order to find someone he is
looking for in a certain city, simply scoured from roof to cellar the
houses which, from the outside, seemed somehow abnormal to him,
were it only in some slight detail. This system is as good as any other.

Similarly, in 1gig, Soupault went into any number of impos-
sible buildings to ask the concierge whether Philippe Soupault did
in fact live there. He would not have been surprised, I suspect, by an
affirmative reply. He would have gone and knocked on his door,


--- Page 23 ---
46  Manifestoes of Surrealism

tacle it was he was seeing. I shall be alone, very alone
within myself, indifferent to all the world’s ballets. What
I have done, what I have left undone, I give it to you.

And ever since I have had a great desire to show forbear-
ance to scientific musing, however unbecoming, in the
final analysis, from every point of view. Radios? Fine.
Syphilis? If you like. Photography? I don’t see any reason
why not. The cinema? Three cheers for darkened rooms.
War? Gave us a good laugh. The telephone? Hello. Youth?
Charming white hair. Try to make me say thank you:
“Thank you.” Thank you. If the common man has a high
opinion of things which properly speaking belong to
the realm of the laboratory, it is because such research
has resulted in the manufacture of a machine or the dis-
covery of some serum which the man in the street views
as affecting him directly. He is quite sure that they have
been trying to improve his lot. I am not quite sure to
what extent scholars are motivated by humanitarian aims,
but it does not seem to me that this factor constitutes a
very marked degree of goodness. I am, of course, referring
to true scholars and not to the vulgarizers and popularizers
of all sorts who take out patents. In this realm as in any
other, I believe in the pure Surrealist joy of the man who,
forewarned that all others before him have failed, refuses
to admit defeat, sets off from whatever point he chooses,
along any other path save a reasonable one, and arrives
wherever he can. Such and such an image, by which he
deems it opportune to indicate his progress and which may
result, perhaps, in his receiving public acclaim, is to me,
I must confess, a matter of complete indifference. Nor is
the material with which he must perforce encumber him-
self; his glass tubes or my metallic feathers . . . As for his
method, I am willing to give it as much credit as I do

Manifesto of Surrealism 47

mine, I have seen the inventor of the cutaneous plantar
reflex at work; he manipulated his subjects without
respite, it was much more than an “examination” he was
employing; it was obvious that he was following no set
plan. Here and there he formulated a remark, distantly,
without nonetheless setting down his needle, while his
hammer was never still. He left to others the futile task
of curing patients, He was wholly consumed by and de-
voted to that sacred fever.

Surrealism, such as I conceive of it, asserts our complete
nonconformism clearly enough so that there can be no
question of translating it, at the trial of the real world,
as evidence for the defense. It could, on the contrary, only
serve to justify the complete state of distraction which we
hope to achieve here below. Kant's absentmindedness
regarding women, Pasteur’s absentmindedness about
“grapes,” Curie’s absentmindedness with respect to ve-
hicles, are in this regard profoundly symptomatic. This
world is only very relatively in tune with thought, and
incidents of this kind are only the most obvious episodes
of a war in which I am proud to be participating. Sur-
realism is the “invisible ray” which will one day enable
us to win out over our opponents. “You are no longer
trembling, carcass.” This summer the roses are blue; the
wood is of glass. The earth, draped in its verdant cloak,
makes as little impression upon me as a ghost. It is living
and ceasing to live that are imaginary solutions. Existence
is elsewhere.


