--- Page 1 ---
Chapter Nine

Some Lessons from

Financial Market History

We previously determined bond and stock values through discounted cash flow and the law of one price techniques.
Arguably, the single most important question in finance is this:

Are the prices we observe for bonds, stocks, and other investments unbiased estimates of their actual value?

The answer to that question is crucial for anyone trying to achieve their financial goals through public securities.
For the professional investor and the corporate manager alike, if prices deviate regularly and significantly from the
value of the underlying asset, then there should be positive net present value opportunities aplenty. However, if
prices on average are unbiased estimates of asset values, then it will be difficult to systematically identify mispricing
that generates positive NPV investments. Since the primary goal of a for-profit enterprise is value maximization,
we will take our time as we carefully consider the appropriate response to that big question.

Investigation of that question began with the French mathematician Louis Jean-Baptiste Alphonse Bachelier in
1900. Louis got the ball rolling by assuming stock prices result from an underlying random process. He’s the one
responsible for planting the seed that the asset prices we observe result from a stochastic process, perhaps like a
random walk. In modern times, the central figure in the discussion of asset prices and their values is undoubtedly
Eugene Fama. In 1970, Dr. Fama published a famous paper in which he proposed his Efficient Market Hypothesis
(EMH). In an efficient market, prices respond quickly and accurately to new information. Essentially, the theory is
a careful examination of the fundamental equation of finance. Recall from Chapter Five,
ye E[FYV | information]

(1 + E[r | information])’

In an efficient market, as new information arrives, market participants quickly revise their conditional expectations
about an asset’s future cash flows and, of course, the anticipated risk. If market participants are risk-averse, then
the perceived risk in the numerator will determine the expected return in the denominator. The nominal return risk-

The chapter’s text was written by Mark J. Laplante, Ph.D.

Copyright 2025. All rights reserved.

Distribution of this chapter without the written consent of the author is strictly prohibited.

This chapter derives some figures from Ross, Westerfield, and Jordan’s, “Fundamentals of Corporate Finance,” thirteenth edition, McGraw
Hill Higher Education, 2021, though they were heavily edited.

The data used for most tables and graphs are from the 2020 SBBI Yearbook from Duff & Phelps.


--- Page 2 ---
averse investors demand should reflect their views on inflation, their rate of time preference, and the real
compensation they demand to bear the economic bad of uncertainty. If the market is efficient, then the market price
incorporates all available and relevant information and it equals the present value. If Dr. Fama is right, then in an
efficient market there is no reason to believe that the current price is too low or too high. On average, if information
is fully impounded in the price, it should be just right.

A corollary that follows from the Efficient Market Hypothesis is that mispricing is a fleeting opportunity that
rational investors will fully exploit if they can to produce abnormal returns. An abnormal return is an outsized
holding period yield that is disconnected from the risk borne by the investor. It’s the investor’s informational
advantage that produces the big fat return, not solely the risk undertaken.

Case in point, if you can buy a Jackson Pollock painting for $1,000 at a garage sale and sell it a year later for
$100 million at Sotheby’s, the famous art auction house, you will generate a miraculous 9,999,900% return on
investment in a single year. Of course, speculating on garage sale art is a risky business, but still, it doesn’t justify
that kind of astronomical return. Your expectation might be for a 200%, or perhaps even a 1,000% return on hunting
for garage sale treasures, certainly not ten million percent. The return here is abnormal because it’s disconnected
from the risk you bear.

The true source of your abnormal return is almost entirely due to the informational advantage you have over the
seller. You know it could be a Pollock, and your counterparty doesn’t. Consequently, they’ve mispriced the asset
and, through your superior knowledge, capture a ginormous net present value payoff for yourself.

Investors who believe they possess superior skill at identifying mispriced assets that will generate abnormal
returns are chasing alpha. Alpha is the excess performance beyond a risk-adjusted benchmark that a skilled investor
delivers for themselves and their clients. In an efficient market, capturing alpha poses a significant challenge
because, on average, asset prices are right. The alpha-hunting investor must be truly adept at spotting and quickly
trading to exploit pricing anomalies, which may be few, fleeting, and far between if the EMH holds.

An oft-ignored but vital aspect of the efficient market hypothesis is that an alpha-producing investment scheme
must be a replicable strategy. Why? Because a big fat abnormal return might be nothing more than the product of
plain dumb luck. To illustrate the importance of luck, assume that the probability of beating the S&P500 in a given
year is nothing more than a fair coin toss. Make the further assumption that there are 100,000 chartered financial
analysts (CFAs) in the U.S. trying to beat that benchmark. They all start the year by tossing a coin, heads they beat
the S&P500, tails they don’t. Out of a pool of 100,000 coin tossers, probabilistically, there will be one CFA that
will land seventeen straight heads, producing a long-run abnormal return for their clients. So, is our single surviving
CFA a super investor with astounding abilities to exploit market anomalies? Of course, the CFA believes they are,
and will spin a tale of unique alpha-generating superpowers for their client. However, the truth of the matter is that
we expect some incredibly lucky investor to beat the S&P500 for long stretches of years out of a pool of 100,000
coin flippers, be they a chartered financial analyst or a chimpanzee. On the other hand, an alpha-producing manager
who repeats the feat beyond what’s explainable by chance indicates there are exploitable biases between asset prices
and values due to an inefficient market. Ultimately, assessing a market’s efficiency comes down to careful empirical
analysis.

Because the concept figures so prominently in studies of market history, we describe the key points about the
EMH here. To illustrate how prices behave in an efficient market, suppose Pfizer (PFE) has, through years of secret
research and development, developed a new broad-spectrum anticancer daily supplement. PFE’s capital budgeting
analysis suggests that launching the new supplement will be a highly profitable move; in other words, the expected
net present value is hugely positive. The key assumption thus far is that Pfizer has not released any public


--- Page 3 ---
information about the new supplement. The supplement’s existence and its potentially blockbuster value-creating
impact are private information known only to the C-suite and Pfizer’s board of directors.

Now consider Pfizer’s share price. In an efficient market, its price reflects what traders know about PFE’s current
operations and profitability, and it reflects the market opinion about PFE’s potential for future growth and profits.
The share price does not reflect the supplement’s potential because the market is unaware of its existence.

If the market agrees with PFE’s assessment of the value of the new project, PFE’s stock price will rise when the
decision to launch is made public. For example, assume the board announces the supplement and its benefits in a
press release on Wednesday morning. In an efficient market, the price of Pfizer’s shares will adjust quickly to this
revelation. Investors should not be able to buy the stock on Wednesday afternoon and then sell it on Thursday to
make a profit. To do so would imply that the stock market took a whole day to realize the implications of the press
release. If the market is efficient, the share price will fully impound the press release information by Wednesday
afternoon, and the opportunity to make a quick profit from the price bump will have vanished.

The figure below presents three possible stock price adjustment paths for Pfizer shares. The figure represents an
event study, where Day 0 corresponds to the day of the announcement. As illustrated, before the announcement,
PFE’s stock sold for $140 per share. The NPV per share of the new supplement is, say, $40, so the new price will
be $180 once the shares fully reflect the value added by the new project.

220 °

©» Overreation and correction
©.
a)
WORF —S- Efficient market reaction
e
~ -%
2 oc Delayed reaction
8 140 -
_
a
100

1 1 1 |__| 1 |__t |,
-§ -6 -4 -2 0 +2 +4 +6 +8
Days relative to announcement day

The solid line in the figure represents the path taken by the stock price in an efficient market. In this case, the
price adjusts immediately to the new information by taking a big jump from $140 up to $180, and no further
changes in the share price occur. If the price is the present value of all the expected future cash flows, then the $40
increase is evidence that the market participants view the announcement as good news. It must be a positive surprise
that took the market by surprise. There’s a whole host of possible suspects. In general, it could be the revelation of
better-than-expected earnings for the quarter, a surge in consumer demand for the company’s products, the merger
with its chief competitor, the dismissal of an enormous civil suit, or a research and development breakthrough.

In this case, Pfizer’s supplement announcement provided investors with new, encouraging information, which
they processed and used to update their conditional expectations. The efficient reaction would then be that those


--- Page 4 ---
expectations correctly reflect that the new supplements will add $40 of net present value per share, and the price
will adjust instantaneously to incorporate the updated opinions of the traders.

The dashed and dotted lines are alternative inefficient narratives where the initial price adjustment to the
announcement surprise is incorrect, and it takes days for the price to adjust to a level that is an unbiased estimate of
Pfizer’s value proposition. Consider the delayed reaction first. If that’s the average price path a stock takes upon
the unexpected revelation of good news, do any traders have a profit incentive to collect the information, process
it, and then use it to trade for their benefit? Suppose a clever and capable trader named Warren does just that, and
realizes after four days that Pfizer’s press release should add $40 to the stock price. At that point, the stock trades
at $160, but Warren believes it’s worth $180.

What will he do? If he has faith that his analysis is valid, he’ll put his money where his mouth is and adopt a
long strategy. A long strategy is the age-old attempt to buy low now and sell high later. In Warren’s case, he’ ll buy
Pfizer at $160 and hope that the other traders will realize the stock is worth $180. In essence, he’s trying to capture
the $20 of mispricing. However, he does not have to wait passively for the share price to rise. He will start buying
Pfizer stock, and a lot of it.

Ask yourself, how many shares will Warren want to buy at $160 when he thinks it’s underpriced by $20? How
many shares of mispriced shares would you buy? The answer in both cases is as many as possible. Warren is an
institutional investor, not a retail investor like you, so he can throw big dollars at the trade. His purchases will create
excess demand for the stock, and in response, the price will start to rise. When the stock reaches $170, what does
Warren do? He keeps buying. $175? He keeps at it. And when will Warren stop buying? He’ll stop going long when
the market price equals Warren’s conditional expectation of $180. At that point, there’s no longer any mispricing
to capture.

The story leads us to two crucial conclusions. First, if Warren is right, he will generate $20 of profit on an initial
investment of $160; that’s a 12.5% return in a matter of days. As you will see when we look at U.S. financial data
later in this chapter, on average, an investor waits a year to earn a 12% return from holding a portfolio of common
stock. Warren does it in a couple of days, not a year. That’s an abnormal return. That’s alpha. Is Warren bearing
risk? Sure, he is. However, his 12% return is almost entirely due to the fact that he exploits his informational
advantage to generate an abnormal return that is disconnected from the risk-reward tradeoff.

The second point is that Warren’s self-interested profit-seeking actions make the market more efficient. Warren
chasing alpha results in a full price adjustment in half the time, say four days instead of eight. The point is so
important, we repeat it for emphasis. The informed trader’s actions wring the mispricing out of the market, making
it more efficient. Ultimately, their trades actually take the profit potential off the table. If Warren can generate a
positive alpha in four days, does Benjamin have an incentive to do the same thing more quickly, perhaps two days
instead of four? Indeed, and the arms race is off and running. Market participants always have a profit incentive to
collect, process, and trade on new relevant surprises faster than their competitors. If they can do it consistently, they
will generate abnormal returns for themselves and their clients and become fabulously wealthy in the process. It’s
this hypercompetitive logic that drives the ongoing efforts by institutional investors and their IT departments to
shave milliseconds off the process.

An alternative to the inefficient delayed response is an overreaction, represented by the dotted line in the figure.
In this case, the traders fully recognize that Pfizer’s anticancer supplement revelation is excellent news for the
shareholders, but their euphoria leads to the share price overshooting the efficient level of $180. They’re collectively
suffering from a bout of irrational exuberance, if you will. In this scenario, do any traders with cooler heads have a


--- Page 5 ---
profit incentive, once again, to collect the information, correctly process it, and try to capture alpha through
identifying mispricing? Yes, two parties in fact.

The first are those investors whose portfolios currently hold Pfizer stock. Their analysis may lead them to the
conclusion that the supplement is good news, but not that good. If they ascertain that the project’s value should add
$40 to the price, but it currently trades at $220, what will they do? Put another way, how many shares will they
want to sell at $220 that they think are truly worth $180? The answer is all of them. The investors currently holding
Pfizer who arrive at this conclusion will dump the stock. As they sell, it will create excess supply, and the stock
price will fall. Analagous to Warren’s actions, the trades of these profit-chasing investors will drive the price toward
the efficient solution, making the market more efficient in the process. And when will they stop selling? When the
market price equals the value of their conditional expectations, $180.

And what of investors who do not own Pfizer? Can they turn a profit by correctly identifying the mispricing due
to the overreaction? Yes, through a short sale. Suppose Muriel correctly concludes that Pfizer shares are overpriced
at $220 but doesn’t own any. She can borrow them from her stockbroker, say Charles Schwab, and perhaps 500
shares. Schwab will sell 500 shares on Muriel’s behalf at the going price, $220. That results in $110,000 of cash
landing in Muriel’s account. She cannot touch the proceeds until she replaces the 500 borrowed shares. If the shares
fall to $180 as predicted, Muriel can replace the 500 shares for $90,000, leaving her with a hefty profit of $20,000
on no money down. In contrast to the long strategy of buying low earlier and selling high later, a short strategy is
just the opposite. Muriel sells the borrowed shares at a high price now and repurchases them at a lower price later.
Muriel’s informational advantage and trading strategy produce an infinite rate of return. That is undoubtedly
abnormal.

Muriel’s strategy is not quite as simple as described because there are transaction costs we ignore in the story.
Nonetheless, short sales unsurprisingly involve selling the underlying asset, in this case, Pfizer stock. In
combination, the selling activity of current owners and shorts who believe Pfizer is overpriced at $220 should
quickly drive the share price towards the efficient level of $180.

At first blush, the quick and correct adjustments to asset values predicted by Dr. Fama’s Efficient Market
Hypothesis seem implausible. However, if you believe the world possesses clever and capable individuals who
stand ready and able to capture abnormal returns through trading on pricing anomalies through either long or short
positions, then the incentives create a kind of competitive doom loop that eliminates mispricing quickly. When we
stop to thoroughly consider the motivations and behavior of rational profit-seeking human beings, market efficiency
doesn’t seem so crazy after all.

The efficient markets hypothesis (EMH) asserts that well-organized capital markets, such as the NYSE and
NASDAQ, are efficient markets, at least as a practical matter. In other words, an advocate of the EMH might argue
that although inefficiencies may exist, they are relatively small and uncommon. There is a subtlety to the efficient
markets argument that many critics miss. The EMH doesn’t argue that market prices are always correct. Instead, it
proposes that efficient markets produce unpredictable price movements. To see this, consider once again the
fundamental equation of finance below.

E [F V | information]

PV= ;
(1 + E[r | information])

In an efficient market, the price should be an unbiased estimate of the present value of the expected future cash
flows the asset will produce through an uncertain future. Critically, the valuation depends on the information set
possessed by the market participants. Ask yourself the following question: What will happen to the asset’s value if


--- Page 6 ---
you receive new information that confirms the conditional expectations you already held? The answer is nothing.
The expected cash flows and returns remain unchanged because the news confirms your beliefs, so the present value
doesn’t budge an inch.

So, what will change the price? A surprise. Some unanticipated revelation that forces you to revise your beliefs.
In doing so, you will update your conditional expectations, and the result will be a change in the asset’s perceived
value. However, by definition, a surprise is unpredictable. This is exactly EMH’s point. Unforeseen changes in asset
prices follow from unforcastable revelations that alter the perceived valuations by the market participants. You can’t
predict surprises; therefore, you can’t predict price adjustments. With this insight in mind, consider the following
headline from the financial press.

“Caprico Therapeutics Hammered On A Surprise FDA Rejection”

The Food and Drug Administration rejected the company’s drug application for its experimental treatment of
muscle-wasting conditions with its drug named deramiocel. The FDA notified the company that it hadn’t proved
the effectiveness of deramiocel.

So what do you think? Sounds like an expectedly bad outcome for the company, right? As an investor, how
would you update your conditional beliefs about the expected future cash flows Caprico will produce for its owners?
The drug rejection eliminates potentially two decades of monopoly profits from the timeline. No doubt you’d expect
the price to fall due to a lower present value that incorporates now smaller future values. And that’s what happened.
The headline uses “Hammered,” which actually is a journalistic flourish capturing that Caprico’s stock price
tumbled by 33% after the announcement—in a single trading day. From the point of view of the EMH, here is the
kicker. Who could have predicted the FDA rejection? Other than the FDA employees who drafted the rejection
notice, the honest answer is nobody. The surprise was unpredictable, as was the ensuing stock adjustment.

If Dr. Fama is right, and markets are reasonably efficient, then there is a profound implication for market
participants: all investments in that market are zero net present value propositions. The reason is not complicated.
If prices on average are neither too low nor too high, then the difference between what an investment is worth and
what it costs is nil; hence, the expected NPV is zero. As a result, in an efficient market, investors get precisely what
they pay for when they buy securities, and firms receive exactly what their stocks and bonds are worth when they
float them, given the available information set at the time.

What makes a market efficient is competition among investors. Many individuals spend their entire careers
attempting to identify mispriced stocks. For any given stock, they study what has happened in the past to the stock’s
price and its dividends. They learn, to the extent possible, what a company’s earnings have been, how much the
company owes to creditors, what taxes it pays, what lines of business it is in, what competition does it face, what
does it expend on research and development, the strategic vision of the CEO, what new investments are in the
pipeline, it’s intellectual property which may represent barriers to entry, how sensitive it is to changes in the
economy, and so on.

Not only is there a great deal to know about any particular company, but there is also a powerful incentive for
knowing it, namely, the profit motive. If you know more about a company than other investors in the marketplace,
you can profit from that knowledge by investing in the company’s stock if you have good news and by selling it if
you have bad news.

The logical consequence of all this information gathering and analysis is that mispriced stocks will become
increasingly rare. In other words, due to competition among intelligent and hardworking investors, the market will
become increasingly efficient. A kind of equilibrium emerges when there is just enough mispricing for those who


--- Page 7 ---
are best at identifying it to make a living from it. For most other investors, gathering and analyzing information will
not yield a worthwhile payday.

In the end, the conceptual landscape for the alpha-chasing investor should be an uphill battle. Long and short
strategies deployed to capture abnormal returns require price changes. However, those changes result from
surprises, which, by their very nature, are unpredictable. That’s right, investors who think they can beat the market
are essentially in the business of forecasting the unforecastable. As mere mortals who lack crystal balls, one might
conclude that such efforts are unlikely to be fruitful, and that conclusion is spot on. The overwhelming empirical
evidence indicates that once you account for fees, transaction costs, and dumb luck, identifying a genuine alpha
investor is like finding a needle in the proverbial haystack. Put another way, the data indicate it’s really hard to
produce abnormal returns, which strongly implies markets are reasonably efficient. We will have more to say about
this conclusion below.

Whether or not markets are efficient has been a raging, unsettled debate since Dr. Fama’s 1970 paper. Arguments
for and against market efficiency sometimes take on a quasi-religious fervor. Importantly, it’s the actions of the
alpha-seeking investor that push the price, either by going long or short, toward the efficient outcome.

The anti-efficiency camp tends to fall along two lines. First, there are the behavioralists who view human
cognition and actions as rife with systematic biases. They argue that human psychology and the resulting trading
that follows can distort market prices and produce persistent anomalies. Chief among them are Daniel Kahneman,
Amos Tversky, Robert Shiller, and Richard Thaler.

Many financial practitioners constitute the second vocal cohort of EMH critics. If markets are efficient, then
there will be few replicable opportunities to generate alpha. For a hedge fund manager charging their clients the
eye-wateringly hefty 2-20 fees, efficient markets are bad news. They will charge their clients enormous fees and
produce nothing in return.

To give you a sense of the breadth and depth of the controversy surrounding the Efficient Market Hypothesis,
consider the 2013 recipients of the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. The
winners were Eugene F. Fama, Robert J. Shiller, and Lars Peter Hansen. Excerpts from the nobelprize.org website
follow.

For many of us, the rise and fall of stock prices symbolizes economic development. In the 1960s, Eugene
Fama demonstrated that stock price movements are impossible to predict in the short-term and that new
information affects prices almost immediately, which means that the market is efficient.

In the early 1980s, however, Robert Shiller discovered that stock prices can be predicted over a longer
period, such as over the course of several years. In contrast to the dominant perception, stock prices
fluctuated much more than corporate dividends. Shiller’s conclusion was therefore that the market is
inefficient.

In 1982, Lars Peter Hansen developed a statistical method for testing these types of theories.

That’s right. The Nobel Prizes went to individuals who said markets are efficient, inefficient, and tried to test the
truth of the matter statistically. If that doesn’t convince you of EMH’s controversial history, we don’t know what
will.

Having highlighted the debate, we can also say that much of the criticism of the EMH is misguided because it
is based on a misunderstanding of what the hypothesis says and what it doesn’t. For instance, when the notion of


--- Page 8 ---
market efficiency was first publicized and debated in the popular financial press, it was often characterized by words
to the effect that “throwing darts at the financial page will produce a portfolio that one can expect to do as well as
any managed by professional security analysts.”

Confusion over statements of this sort has often led to a failure to understand the implications of market
efficiency. Case in point, consider the dart-throwing conjecture above. It implies that market efficiency means that
it doesn’t matter how you invest your money because the efficiency of the market will protect you from making a
mistake. However, a random dart thrower might wind up with all of the darts sticking in one or two high-risk stocks
that deal in genetic engineering, or cluster in oil companies. Would you really want all of your money in such
stocks? Probably not because you recognize there’s a decent chance that a random distribution of darts may leave
you well and truly undiversified. Market efficiency will not protect you from foolishly putting all your eggs in one
basket, so to speak.

A contest run by The Wall Street Journal provides a good example of the controversy surrounding market
efficiency. Each month, the Journal asked four professional money managers to pick one stock each. At the same
time, it threw four darts at the stock page to select a comparison group. In the 147 five-and-a-half-month contests
that spanned over twelve years, the pros won 90 times.

The fact that the pros were ahead of the darts by 90 to 57 suggests that the pros might be able to identify
mispricing because markets are not efficient. Or does it? One problem is that the darts naturally tend to select stocks
of average risk. The pros are playing to win and naturally select riskier stocks, or so it is argued. If this is true, then,
on average, we expect the pros to win because we know that higher risks garner larger rewards.

Furthermore, the WSJ announced the pros’ picks to the public at the start of each contest. This publicity may
have somewhat boosted the prices of the shares involved, leading to a partially self-fulfilling prophecy.
Unfortunately, the Journal discontinued the contest, so this test of market efficiency is no longer ongoing. However,
the story highlights that there are relevant subtleties to consider when evaluating tests of market efficiency, and that
examining the issue is not as straightforward as it may seem at first glance.

More than anything else, what efficiency implies is that the price a firm will obtain when it sells a share of its
stock is a “fair” price in the sense that it reflects the value of that stock given the information available about the
firm. Shareholders do not have to worry that they are paying too much for a stock with a low dividend or some
other sort of characteristic because the market has already incorporated that characteristic into the price. We
sometimes say that the information has been “priced out.”

The idea behind the EMH was once illustrated by the following short story: A student was walking down the
hall with her finance professor when they both saw a $20 bill on the ground. As the student bent down to pick it up,
the professor shook his head slowly and, with a look of disappointment on his face, said patiently to the student,
“Don’t bother. If it were really there, someone else would have picked it up already.” The moral of the story reflects
the logic of the efficient markets hypothesis: If you think you have found a pattern in stock prices or a simple device
for picking winners, you probably have not.

A common objection made by critics is that the market cannot be efficient because stock prices fluctuate from
day to day. If the prices are correct, the argument goes, then why do they change so much and so often? From our
discussion of the market, we can see that these price movements are in no way inconsistent with the concept of
efficiency. Investors are bombarded with new information every day, and that torrent undoubtedly contains its fair
share of surprises. The fact that prices fluctuate is, at least in part, a reflection of that information flow changing
conditional expectations in real time. In fact, the absence of price movements in a world that changes as rapidly as
ours would suggest inefficiency.


--- Page 9 ---
It is common to distinguish between three forms of market efficiency. Depending on the degree of efficiency, we
say that markets are either weak form efficient, semistrong form efficient, or strong form efficient. The
difference between these forms relates to what information prices reflect.

We start with the extreme case. If the market is strong form efficient, then all information of every kind is
correctly impounded in asset prices. Public and private information is in the price under strong form efficiency. In
such a market, there is no such thing as inside information. Consider the Pfizer example again. We implicitly
assumed that the market was not strong form efficient. The board and C-suite had material information about the
supplement project that the share price did not incorporate until the press release announced the investment to the
general public. It was when the information moved from the private to the public domain that a price change
resulted.

Casual observation, particularly in recent years, suggests that inside information does exist, and it can be
valuable to possess. Whether it is lawful or ethical to use that information is another issue. In any event, we conclude
that valuable alpha-producing private information about a company and its plans certainly exists, and the current
stock price probably does not reflect it. For example, prior knowledge of a takeover attempt could be very valuable
because acquirers often pay a premium for the target. Buying the target now and selling after the acquisition
announcement would likely yield a noteworthy abnormal return.

The second form of efficiency, semistrong form efficiency, is the most controversial. If a market is semistrong
form efficient, then all information available to the public at large is reflected in the stock price. The reason this
form is controversial is that it implies that a security analyst who attempts to identify mispriced stocks, using, for
example, financial statement disclosures filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, is wasting their time.
SEC filings are freely available to the public, so their release should impact the share price of a public company
very quickly, taking the money off the table for the analyst.

Weak form is the third type of market efficiency. It suggests that, at a minimum, the current price of a stock
reflects the stock’s own price history and other market variables that anyone can observe. In other words, studying
past prices and volume in an attempt to identify mispriced securities is futile if the market is weak form efficient.
Although this form of efficiency might seem rather mild, it implies that searching for patterns in historical prices to
identify mispriced stocks will not be effective (although this practice is quite common).

Weak and semistrong efficiency depend on the information available to the general public. Semistrong
encompasses all that information, while weak form covers a much smaller range of the set. Weak form focuses
narrowly on historical market data, principally, price and volume. Let’s face it, the least you should know about a
security is what its prices have been in the past. Ifa market is semistrong efficient, then it is also weak form efficient
because market data is a subset of all public information. Though they differ, semistrong and weak form efficiency
follow from the same underlying logic. If all the market participants have access to the same public resources, then
nobody has an informational advantage. Without a distinct advantage, there’s no reason to believe a trader can use
information everyone else has to capture abnormal returns. Along these lines, the famous Wall Street financier
Bernard Baruch allegedly said it best: “Something that everyone knows isn’t worth anything.”

If Bernard is correct, then two common stockpicking strategies are doomed to fail. As we saw in the last chapter,
fundamental analysis is a discounted cash flow approach to stock valuation. The analyst estimates the expected
future free cash flows a company is likely to produce, those above what’s necessary to cover the company’s
operating expenses and capital investments, then uses an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate to get their present
value. The analyst then divides total value by the number of shares outstanding, and voila, arrives at an estimate of


--- Page 10 ---
what a share is worth. If the valuation is greater than the current market price, the analyst goes long. If the market
price is greater than the estimated value, they short the stock.

What could go wrong? Plenty. The fundamental problem (yes, that’s a pun) is that the analyst typically derives
their estimates from publicly available resources, in particular, corporate SEC filings. That information is available
to any interested party through the SEC’s EDGAR database. Check it out at sec.gov. Using data available to
anybody confirms no informational advantage to the fundamental analyst. In addition, using that information to
forecast the company’s expected future cash flows and ascertaining the appropriate discount rate is to enter a
minefield of estimation error. Unsurprisingly, there is scant evidence to suggest fundamental analysis can reliably
produce abnormal returns, which is consistent with semistrong efficiency.

Another widespread stock picking approach is to use technical analysis, sometimes called charting, to identify
winners and losers. While fundamental analysis tries to pierce the fog of a company’s uncertain future, technical
analysis focuses entirely on its past. It uses historical market data, typically price and volume, to predict where a
security’s price will go next. The most common approach is to use rolling long-run and short-run moving averages
to try to extract reliable pricing signals from noisy price movements, then use the signals to capture alpha through
long or short positions.

There are serious conceptual problems with this strategy. If the market price is the present value of the
conditionally expected future cash flows given the currently available information set, then why should the stock
price from ninety days ago matter? The information today is superior to what was available to the trader three
months ago. The position of the technical trader is that the three-month-old stock price contains useful predictive
information that the current stock price lacks. By analogy, it’s like saying the weather three months ago is a better
predictor of the weather tomorrow than the weather today. It simply does not pass the logical sniff test.

If the market is weak form efficient, then technical analysis is a big waste of time. Many academic research
studies that have examined the approach reject that, on average, the strategy can produce abnormal returns. The
financial academic, practitioner, and author Burton Malkiel concludes, “Technical analysis is akin to astrology.”
Along that same line of thought, most brokerage houses provide free technical analysis tools to their clients.
Consider this quote from Charles Schwab about its thinkorswim trading platform.

Get ready to trade with the best of ’em. With award-winning thinkorswim® platforms now at Schwab,
you'll get powerful features and real-time insights that let you dive deeper into the market and your trading
strategies.

A skeptical student might rightly ask, if thinkorswim works, why would Schwab give it away? Wouldn’t the
company keep it a secret and use it to successfully deliver abnormal returns to the Schwab shareholders? In fact, it
would be the fiduciary obligation of the C-suite to do exactly that if the tool worked. The suspicious student might
conclude that thinkorswim won’t produce abnormal returns because the market is weak form efficient, but it will
encourage Schwab clients to trade frequently, generating fees for the brokerage house.

It’s definitely not all smooth sailing for the Efficient Market Hypothesis. Momentum is definitely a thorn in the
side of EMH. A momentum strategy assumes that stocks whose prices have made recent gains will make further
gains going forward. Put succinctly, momentum trades try to exploit the idea that winners will keep winning. If
true, momentum appears to clearly violate semistrong and weak form efficiency. Many academic studies document
that momentum strategies can produce superior risk-adjusted returns across multiple asset classes, and the results
are robust internationally. On its face, momentum contradicts the Efficient Market Hypothesis.

10


--- Page 11 ---
However, like all things academic, there is an ongoing debate about the relationship between momentum and
efficiency. First, is momentum a pricing anomaly, or is it compensating investors for a risk factor we do not fully
understand? If that’s true, then momentum is consistent with the risk-reward tradeoff and efficiency. Second, the
momentum anomaly appears to be diminishing. That shouldn’t come as a surprise. If traders believe winners will
keep winning, and it takes virtually no skill to spot recent winners, then the excess demand for winners will push
up their prices, and their expected returns will fall. So, perhaps momentum isn’t a nail in EMH’s coffin after all.

We conclude our discussion of momentum and efficiency with a humorous anecdote. Cliff Asness was Dr.
Fama’s doctoral student at the Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago (Booth was another of Fama’s

.

students). Mr. Asness’s dissertation, “Variables that Explain Stock Returns,” extended the momentum line of
research. He went on to co-found the hedge fund AQR Capital Management and ultimately joined the rarefied
billionaire’s club. Now that’s some alpha right there, all produced by a student of the very father of market
efficiency. Wow.

In conclusion, what does capital market history say about market efficiency? Here again, there is great
controversy: At the risk of going out on a limb, we can say that the evidence seems to tell us three things. First,
prices appear to respond rapidly to new information, and the response is at least not grossly different from what we
would expect in an efficient market. Second, the future of market prices, particularly in the short run, is difficult to
predict based on publicly available information. Third, if mispriced stocks exist, then there is no obvious means of
identifying them. Put another way, simple-minded schemes based on publicly available information are unlikely to
be successful. In other words, we will assume markets are reasonably semistrong form efficient going forward.

Assuming markets are semistrong efficient is essential because we are about to examine the historical returns of
several asset classes with an eye to learning important lessons. If the markets are not efficient, then the prices will
not be meaningful, and the resulting returns will be nothing but noise. In contrast, if markets are reasonably efficient,
then the prices we observe will be unbiased estimates of the assets’ actual values, and we may learn from their
associated returns.

Thus far, we haven’t had much to say about what determines the required return on an investment. In one sense, the
answer is simple: The required return depends on the risk of the investment. The greater the risk, the greater is the
required return. Having said this, we are left with a somewhat more difficult problem. How can we measure the
level of risk associated with an investment? Put another way, what does it mean to say that one investment is riskier
than another? Clearly, we need to define what we mean by ‘risk’ if we are to answer these questions. This is our
task for the remainder of this chapter and the next. From the last several chapters, we know that one of the
responsibilities of the financial manager is to assess the value of proposed real asset investments. In doing this, it is
essential that we first look at what financial investments have to offer. At a minimum, the return we require from a
project proposed in treasury must be greater than what we can get by buying financial assets of similar risk.

Our goal in this chapter is to provide a perspective on what capital market history can tell us about risk and
return. The most important thing to take away from this chapter is a feel for the numbers. What is a high return?
What is a low return? More generally, what returns should we expect from alternative financial asset classes, and
what are the risks of such investments? This perspective is essential for understanding how to analyze and value
risky investment projects.

We start our discussion of risk and return by describing the historical experience of investors in U.S. financial
markets. In 1931, for example, the stock market lost 43 percent of its value. Just two years later, the stock market
gained 54 percent. In more recent memory, the market lost about 25 percent of its value on October 19, 1987, alone.

11


--- Page 12 ---
What lessons, if any, can financial managers learn from such shifts in the stock market? We will explore almost a
century of market history to find out.

Not everyone agrees on the value of studying history. On the one hand, there is philosopher George Santayana’s
famous comment: “Those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” On the other hand, there is
industrialist Henry Ford’s equally famous comment: “History is more or less bunk.” Nonetheless, perhaps everyone
would agree with Mark Twain’s observation: “October. This is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to speculate
in stocks. The others are July, January, September, April, November, May, March, June, December, August, and
February.”

We will discuss historical returns on different types of financial assets. Roger Ibbotson and Rex Sinquefield
conducted a famous set of studies examining rates of return in U.S. financial markets. The source of their data and
the graphs that follow come from The 2020 SBBI Yearbook from Duff & Phelps. They presented year-to-year
historical rates of return on five noteworthy types of financial investments. You can interpret the returns as what
you would have earned if you had held portfolios of the following:

Fixed Income

1. U.S. Treasury bills: These are T-bills with a one-month maturity, making them the reference riskless asset.
The bills are rolled over each month so that all principal and interest get reinvested.

2. Long-term U.S. government bonds: These are U.S. government bonds with 20 years to maturity, which lack
credit and liquidity risk, but these bondholders bear price risk. After a year passes, the bond will have 19 years
to maturity. It is sold and replaced with a 20-year bond in order to maintain the same exposure to interest rate
risk throughout the time series. The portfolio reinvests all coupons.

3. Long-term corporate bonds: These are investment-grade bonds with 20 years to maturity. Like the Treasurys,
each year 19-year bonds are replaced with 20-year bonds to preserve the level of price risk. The portfolio
reinvests all coupons. Corporate bondholders bear all fixed-income risks: liquidity, credit, and interest rate risk.

Equity: The residual claimants of these companies bear more risk than all other parties with priority claims.

4. Large-company stocks: This common stock portfolio is based on the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 Index,
which contains 500 of the largest companies (in terms of total market value of outstanding stock) in the United
States. When large companies become small, they are replaced. When small companies grow large, they are
added to the portfolio. The portfolio reinvests all dividends.

5. Small-company stocks: This is a portfolio composed of the stock corresponding to the smallest 20 percent of
the companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, again as measured by the market value of outstanding
stock. It is rebalanced annually to always hold the smallest 20 percent and reinvests any dividends paid.

These returns are nominal pretax returns that are not adjusted for inflation. Of course, inflation matters to investors,
so we present the year-to-year percentage change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). With nominal returns and a
measure of inflation, we can calculate the implied real rates of return on the different asset classes.

We begin with the big picture. The figure on the next page shows what happened to $1 invested in these different
portfolios at the end of 1925. The growth in value for each of the different portfolios over the 94 years ending in
2021 is given separately (the figure omits the long-term corporate bonds for clarity). Notice that to get everything


--- Page 13 ---
on a single graph, we modify the typical scaling. As is commonly done with financial series, the vertical axis is
scaled so that equal distances measure equal percentage changes in values. This is a logarithmic scale.

Looking at the figure, we see that the small-cap investment did the best overall. Every dollar invested grew to a
remarkable $49,052 over the 94 years. The large-company common stock portfolio did less well; a dollar invested
in it grew to $11,535. At the other end of the spectrum, the T-bill portfolio rose to only $22.05. This is even less
impressive when we consider the inflation over the period in question. As illustrated, the increase in the price level
was such that $16.58 was needed at the end of the period just to replace the original $1.

$100,000
$49,052.04
$11,535.21
$10,000 : /*
~/
Small-company stocks
$1,000 | /
f*
J Large-company
SL stocks $130.89
$100)
$22.05
$10} rf $16.58

T-bills Inflation

Year-end

Given the historical record, why would anybody buy anything other than small-cap stocks? If you look closely,
you will probably see the answer. The T-bill and long-term government bond portfolios grew more slowly than did
the stock portfolios, but they also grew much more steadily. The small stocks ultimately prevailed, but as you can
see, their growth was quite erratic at times. For example, the small stocks were the worst performers for about the
first 10 years and had a smaller return than long-term government bonds for over 15 years. It’s clear that comparing
the relatively smooth plots of the Treasurys against the highly jagged paths of the equities, stocks have significantly
greater volatility than fixed-income instruments.

13


--- Page 14 ---
To illustrate the variability at the opposite extremes of the investments, consider the plots for Treasury bills
versus small company stock portfolios on the next page. The vertical bars drawn from the horizontal axis represent
the year- to-year percentage returns. The height of the bar tells us the return for the particular year. For example,
looking at Treasury bills, we see that the largest historical return of 14.71 percent occurred in 1981. This was a good
year for nominal returns on the riskless asset, but that’s because inflation was running at 12.40 percent the year
before.

When comparing these charts, notice the differences in the vertical axis scales. With these differences in mind,
you can see how predictably the Treasury bills behaved compared to the small-company stocks. The returns shown

150, Small Company Stocks

100+

i | i A f al | cll lutte

0

x
E -50f
z Treasury Bills
16,
- 44
12

4
2
9 Ih. = wl hil bis |. ll

1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Year-end

in these bar graphs are sometimes very large. Looking at the graphs, for example, we see that the largest single-year
return is a remarkable 142.87 percent for the small-cap stocks in 1933, which is nearly ten times the maximum
return of T-bills.

While the small-cap portfolio’s highs are higher than those of Treasury bills, the other side of that coin is that
the downside risks are sobering. You can see that there are many years of losses for someone holding a small
company stock portfolio. In fact, thirty out of ninety-four years realized negative returns. That’s almost a third of
all observations. The most significant loss was a decline of nearly 60 percent in 1931 during the Great Depression.

In contrast, there was only one year in which T-bills had a negative nominal return of 2 bps in 1938. However,
there was 2.78 percent deflation, implying that Treasury bills generated a real return of approximately 2.76 percent.
For all the remaining years, T-bills had strictly positive nominal returns.

1 There is a question as to whether 1938’s negative T-bill return actually occurred or was the result of inaccurately recorded
data. For example, a different data set indicates the annual rate of return for 1938 was a positive 7 bps.

14


--- Page 15 ---
We know from our prior work that there are two ways to measure an average return. You use the arithmetic average
when considering the distribution of a random variable. It’s the value you expect before you withdraw your hand
from a black bag of realized observations. You must use the geometric mean when applying time value of money
equations. With these two measures in mind, the table below presents the summary statistics for the annual returns
behind the Ibbotson-Sinquefield graphs. We include corporate bonds that the graphs did not show.

Arithmetic Standard Geometric Real
Average Deviation Max. Min. Mean Rate

Inflation 2.9% 4.0% 18.2% -10.3% 2.9%

T-bills 3.4 3.1 14.7 -0.02 3.3 0.39%

Treasurys 6.0 9.8 40.4 -14.9 5.5 2.57
Corporates 6.4 8.5 29.1 -15.7 6.1 3.11
Big Co.s 12.1 19.8 54.0 -43.3 10.2 7.09
Small Co.s 16.3 31.5 142.8 -59.8 11.9 8.75

Given the nature of the arithmetic average return, if you were to pick a year at random from the 94-year history of
corporate bonds and guess what the return was for that year, then the error-minimizing guess would be 6.4 percent.
The data indicate that as we move from short-term T-bills, to 20-year bonds, to equities, the average arithmetic
return increases.

As for the geometric return, it’s the single return in the fundamental equation of finance that equates a dollar
invested in a large company stock portfolio at the end of 1925 to $11,535.21 by the end of 2021, which is an annual
geometric return of 10.2 percent. As expected, the portfolio’s geometric average return is less than its arithmetic
average 12.1%. Nonetheless, the same pattern holds. The geometric returns increase as you move from the T-bills,
to fixed-income, to stocks.

Both of these averages are nominal returns, or percentage changes in dollars. At the same time your money is
tied up in any of these investments, the data indicate that the general price level rose an average of 2.9 percent per
year, as measured by the Consumer Price Index. Using the quick and dirty Fisher approximation, the average real
return on Treasury bills is about 3.4 percent less 2.9 percent, or 50 bps of real consumption growth per year.

However, when using time value of money equations, the geometric mean is the correct return, in this case, 3.3
percent for Treasury bills. Applying the Fisher equation,

1.033 = (1+ R) = 1.029

Solving for the real rate produces 39 basis points per year. It is clear from the table’s data that the bulk of a T-bill’s
return covers inflation. T-bills are riskless, so why did investors receive positive, albeit small, gains in purchasing
power? The residual, a measly 39 bps per year, is the real compensation for waiting to consume while holding the
riskless asset. The small real rate reflects the rate of time preference of the marginal investor. They demand extra
purchasing power to put off the certain happiness of current consumption for later uncertain happiness (recall, they
may die before they can enjoy the benefits of a riskless T-bill paying its face value).

The returns are the economic goods. All else equal, you'd prefer a higher return, be it arithmetic or geometric.
And what of the economic bad we call risk? We measure that by the standard deviation of returns as well as the
return extrema for each asset class. Roughly speaking, the table’s pattern is quite convincing. As the risk increases,
so too does the average return. Stocks are the riskiest and pay the most. The money market is secure and provides
T-bill savers with the lowest reward. Bonds fall in between.


--- Page 16 ---
Before we can draw any broad conclusions about risk and reward from the data, an anomaly warrants discussion.
Look closely at Treasurys and corporates. The Treasurys have a larger standard deviation and a wider range of
annual returns, but they provide lower average returns to their owners. What’s going on here? It appears that these
fixed-income securities violate our intuition about risk and reward.

The first possibility is that the standard deviation and the range of possible outcomes are only proxies for the
risks that bondholders care about. Perhaps there is another unknown or yet unnamed risk that bondholders bear and
for which they receive compensation. In short, perhaps the standard deviation is the wrong measure of risk. We will
investigate this prospect further in the next chapter.

There is another explanation, and it requires us to revisit our fixed-income tools. The Ibbotson and Sinquefeld
data compare 20-year Treasurys to 20-year corporates. Though they have the same time to maturity, not all else is
equal between the two fixed-income classes. Consider the following list of bond attributes:

Treasury Corporate

no credit risk credit risk
liquid not liquid

no state & local tax fully taxable
no call feature may be callable

Given these disparate bond features, which twenty-year bond should have a much bigger coupon payment?
Undoubtedly, the corporate issue, and accordingly, the Treasury will have a smaller coupon. Now, if two bonds
have the same time to maturity but one has small coupons and the other has large ones, which one has more price
risk? The conclusion is unmistakable. That means a 20-year Treasury will be much more sensitive to interest rate
changes than a 20-year corporate bond. The bondholder receiving small coupons has relatively more of the
security’s value tied up at the end of the timeline and will experience larger time value of money adjustments when
market rates change. In other words, the Treasurys have more price risk due to their smaller coupons.

This explains, to a large extent, why the Treasury has a larger standard deviation and a wider range of returns
than the matching corporate counterpart. However, corporates have default risk that Treasurys don’t. Treasurys may
swing more when market rates change, but they never lose all their value, unlike some corporates that default. In
part, this may explain why the minimum return on corporates of -15.7 percent is lower than that of Treasurys at -
14.9 percent. So, what is the net concern of the bondholders? Interest rate risk, credit and liquidity risks, and taxes?
To answer the question, we need to consider what the data say about the risk premia, if any, investors require to
hold the different asset classes.

We know that risk-averse market participants will require higher expected returns (the good) to bear greater risk
(the bad). We’ve seen previous empirical evidence to support this proposition, whether it was FICO scores and
interest rates on consumer loans or the yields on investment-grade versus junk bonds. The 2020 SBBI Yearbook
data summarizes nearly a century of investor behavior with many trillions of invested dollars at stake. In other

words, it is both a broader and deeper investigation of the risk preferences of market participants than we’ve seen
to this point.

The data demonstrate that Treasury bills largely compensate their holders for inflation and provide small
consumption gains of 39 bps per annum for waiting. If market participants are risk-averse, they will demand returns

above and beyond the T-bill yield to hold any asset that has uncertain future values and payouts. In other words, we
should see risk premia in the data, and we do.

16


--- Page 17 ---
There are two ways to think of risk premia. First, any nominal interest rate beyond the Treasury bill’s 3.4%
average annual rate of return must be compensation for risk. Second, the real rate on a Treasury bill is the market’s
compensation for waiting to consume. Ifa risky asset has a real rate that exceeds that of a T-bill, it must reflect the
extra compensation that risk-averse parties require to bear the economic bad of uncertainty. The table below
summarizes the results from nearly a century of data.

T-bills Treasurys Corporates _—_ Large Co. Small Co.

Nominal Rate 3.4% 6.0 6.4 12.1 16.3
Nominal risk premium 0% 2.4 2.8 8.7 12.9
Real rate 0.39% 2.57 3.11 7.09 8.75

Real risk premium 0% 2.18 2.72 6.70 8.36

And what does the data say about risk aversion? Broadly speaking, whether measured by nominal or real rates,
it’s a definitive empirical fact. At a minimum, Treasurys and corporates have price risk that T-bills don’t, and they
pay bondholders more than 200 bps a year to bear it. Let’s repeat that for emphasis. Treasury bonds have no credit
risk. They are the long-term riskless asset, but because their market prices fluctuate in unpredictable ways due to
time-varying market conditions, bondholders demand more than two percent per year to hold a security that has no
variation in its future payouts.

This brings us back to our earlier discussion of Treasurys and corporates. Treasurys have more interest rate risk
than corporates, but corporates have greater credit and liquidity risk, in addition to being fully taxable. So, on
balance, what does the data say bondholders care about? Despite having lower price risk, corporates command
nominal and real risk premia in excess of those Treasurys provide. In short, Treasurys may swing more because of
a given interest change, but they never default and remain highly liquid, especially during financial crises. They
also spare their owners the burdens of state and local taxes. Accordingly, the data suggest that bondholders view
them as less risky than corporates. When it comes to the risk-reward tradeoff, there is no fixed-income paradox.

Moving from fixed-income to equities involves risk premia measured in multiples. As we know, corporate
bondholders have a priority claim over the company’s common stockholders. The bondholders require an average
annual risk premium of about 2.8 percent to bear their security’s credit, interest rate, and reinvestment risks, not to
mention that the coupon payments are fully taxable. However, to take one step down and become the riskier residual
claimant, shareholders demand anywhere from an extra four to ten percent per year to bear that risk. Along this
dimension, the data are unequivocal. Those who own equity stakes in public companies are extraordinarily risk-
averse and demand enormous compensation to be at the end of the line for claims on a business enterprise’s cash
flows.

In fact, the chasm between the risk premia on fixed-income and stocks is so vast that it’s known as the equity
premium puzzle. To date, there are no testable economic models of investor behavior that explain why shareholders
are so risk-averse. The risk aversion exhibited by stockholders is so severe that if they acted similarly in their
everyday lives, they would never cross a street because of the non-zero probability of getting run over. And yet, we
see people playing the odds and risking crosswalks daily. It’s a conundrum. Solve it, and you can book your flight
to Scandinavia to collect your Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel.

Of course, one explanation may be that our conclusions are erroneous because the data are the product of
significant random sampling errors. In other words, perhaps the observations from a century of U.S. capital markets
are a statistical anomaly that does not represent the risk preferences of investing human beings in general. The

17


--- Page 18 ---
historical stock market risk premium has been substantial, but perhaps it is too big and overestimates what is likely
to happen in the future. Any time we use the past to predict the future, there is the danger that the past period we
observe isn’t representative of what the future will hold—the classic turkey problem. For example, this chapter
studies the period 1926-2019. Perhaps investors got lucky over this period and earned exceptionally high returns.
Data from earlier years is available, though it is not of the same quality. With that caveat in mind, researchers have
traced returns back to 1802, and the risk premiums seen in the pre-1926 era are perhaps a little smaller, but not
dramatically so.

Another possibility is that the U.S. stock market experience was unusually good. Investors in at least some other
major countries did not do as well because their financial markets were wholly or nearly wiped out by revolution,
war, or hyperinflation. A study? addresses this issue by examining equity risk premium data from 1900 to 2005 for
seventeen countries.

Below Average Average Above Average
Denmark 4.5% 71% United States 7.4%
Belgium 5.0 Sweden 8.0
Switzerland 5.3 South Africa 8.3
Spain 5.5 Australia 8.5
Norway 5.7 Germany 9.1
Canada 5.9 France 9.3
Ireland 6.0 Japan 9.8
Uk 6.1 Italy 10.5

Netherlands 6.6

Looking at the numbers, the U.S. risk premium is the 8th highest at 7.4 percent, which differs from our earlier risk
premia estimates because of the different sample periods. The overall average risk premium is 7.1 percent. These
numbers make it clear that U.S. investors did well, but not exceptionally so, relative to investors in many other
countries. But that’s not the critical point. The essential conclusion is that stockholders around the globe exhibit
severe risk aversion and require significant compensation to accept the business enterprise’s riskiest position, that
of the residual claimant. In other words, the data produced by nearly a century of U.S. capital market history isn’t
some statistical fluke. In the context of the global shareholder experience, it appears that the conclusions we draw
from it are rock solid.

Having carefully considered Treasurys versus corporates and the equity premium, we come to a definitive yet
somewhat anticlimactic conclusion. The risk-reward tradeoff that results from risk aversion, as postulated in
Chapter Five, and the empirical glimpses of support we’ve seen along the way, are a financial economic reality. If
markets are reasonably efficient, implying we can learn essential lessons from meaningful returns, then risk is
unambiguously an economic bad. To attract risk-averse participants, markets must offer them motivating rewards,
such as high compensatory expected returns. That’s one side of the coin. The other side is that significant expected
returns imply sizable anticipated volatility. High risks imply high rewards. High rewards imply high risks. The risk-
averse investor behavior that produces the risk-reward tradeoff is a pillar of modern financial theory. It’s not a
hypothesis. It’s a fact.

2“The Worldwide Equity Premium: A Smaller Puzzle.” Elroy Dimson, et al. In Handook of the Equity Premium, Rajnish
Mehra, editor. Elsevier, 2007.

18


--- Page 19 ---
We conclude the chapter by taking a bit of a deeper dive into the statistical distributions of asset returns. The
arithmetic average measures the first moment of a distribution—its centrality. The standard deviation captures the
second moment, the dispersion around the mean. With these metrics in mind, consider the frequency distribution,
or histogram, for the large-company stock portfolio’s annual returns for our 94-year sample period below.

mw =12.1%
20
2017 2021
2016 2019
2014 2009
3012 2006

2015 2010 2004 2013
2000 2007 1988 2003 1997
1990 2005 1986 1999 1995
1981 1994 1979 1998 1991
1977 1993 1972 1996 1989
1969 1992 1971 1983 1985
1962 1987 1968 1982 1980
2022 1953 1984 1965 1976 1975
2018 1946 1978 1964 1967 1955
2001 1940 1970 1959 1963 1950
1973 1939 1960 1952 1961 1945
2002 1966 1934 1956 1949 1951 1938 1958
2008 1974 1957 1932 1948 1944 1943 1936 1935 1954
1931 , 1937, 1930 , 1941 , 1929 , 1947 , 1926 , 1942 , 1927 , 1928 , 1933
-60 -50 -40 -30 -20 ~--10 0 10 20 30 40 50, 60 70 Percent
-30 -20 -lo 0 t+lo +20 +30

The large-stock portfolio’s mean return is 12.1 percent per year, and its standard deviation is 19.8 percent. Most
of the yearly return observations cluster around the mean. As you move away from the mean and toward the tails,
as measured by standard deviations, observations become rarer, to the point where there are no observations beyond
plus or minus three standard deviations. Painting in broad brushstrokes, the frequency distribution looks humped in
the middle, then tapers away as you move away from the peak in either direction. If you use your imagination, or
perhaps if we had a thousand observations instead of ninety or so to smooth out the shape, you can visualize that
the plot looks kind of like a bell curve. The normal distribution is symmetric about its peak at the mean. Two
parameters completely characterize its shape—the mean and the standard deviation. If we assume asset returns are
normally distributed, like many other random variables in nature, we gain the enormous advantage of being able to
assign probabilities to future events. Of course, we recognize that normality is an assumption, and the quality of the
estimated probabilities will only be as good as how well the normal distribution approximates the true distribution
of asset returns that the underlying random process generates.

Nonetheless, we will assume asset returns are normally distributed so we can assign probabilities to uncertain
future events. The well-known property of the normal distribution is that we expect 68 percent of the observations
to fall within one standard deviation below and above the mean. Extending the range to 1.96 standard deviations,
which we will call 2.0 for simplicity’s sake, encompasses 95 percent of the observations. And, as we all know, 99

19


--- Page 20 ---
percent of the observations fall within plus and minus three standard deviations of the mean. As noted above, the
mean of the large-company stock portfolio is 12.1 percent, and the standard deviation is 19.8 percent. Given these
two parameters, the figure below provides return ranges and their associated probabilities.

Probability

68%

95%
_ ——__| 99% — rr
-30 -20 -lo 0 +lo +20 +30

-474%  -27.6% -7.8% 12.1% 31.8% 51.6% 71.4%
Return on large-company stocks

The bell curve above is quite sobering. If the future is like the past, you will earn an average return of about 12
percent per year if you hold the portfolio for a very long time, decades, in fact. However, you should expect extreme
volatility on the road to that juicy return with all its attendant happiness-inducing consumption. There is a 99 percent
chance that next year, you will lose almost half your money, be up by over 70 percent, or land anywhere in between.
Now that’s uncertainty. Consider a one standard deviation from the mean, a range of losing about 8 percent to
gaining more than 30 percent. That’s saying that every one in three years or so, you will realize a return from
holding large-company stocks that is more extreme than losing an eighth or gaining a third. Simply put, it’s an asset
class that is not for the faint-hearted.

If we extend the normality assumption to the other asset classes, we can use their respective means and standard
deviations to estimate the likelihood of future realizations from the underlying random processes. Recall the
following summary statistics.

Arithmetic Standard
Average Deviation
Inflation 2.9% 4.0%

T-bills 3.4 3.1
Treasurys 6.0 9.8
Corporates 6.4 8.5
Big Co.s 12.1 19.8
Small Co.s 16.3 31.5

A couple of comments about the summary statistics above before we use them to calculate probabilities. First, the
Treasury bill standard deviation of 3.1 percent per year is fundamentally misleading. It seems to imply that you will
experience volatility if you hold them. That’s patently false. All it means is that if you look back over the decades,
the rates of return on Treasury bills were not constant for 94 years. The variation in T-bill holding period yields was

20


--- Page 21 ---
primarily due to time-varying inflation. From a forward-looking perspective, if you buy a Treasury bill, there will
be zero volatility in its future payouts. That’s why it is the riskless asset. In the next chapter, we will have much
more to say about peering into the future rather than staring at the past.

Second, when it comes to risk and reward, it’s clear that fixed income and equity are two totally different
animals. The mean and standard deviation of stocks are an order of magnitude greater than those of bonds. To
highlight this difference, consider the three-standard-deviation ranges for corporate bonds versus small-company
stocks. They are,

lower bound upper bound
Corporates -19.1 to  +31.9%
Small companies -78.2 to +110.8%

Are corporate bonds risky? You bet they are. There’s a 99 percent chance that you will realize a return somewhere
between losing a fifth of your money and gaining a third. But that pales in comparison to the rollercoaster ride you
will take if you hold a small-company stock portfolio. In just one year, you may lose four-fifths of your wealth or
more than double your money. Compared to corporates, the lows and highs are about four times as extreme. For
those individuals chasing big fat returns who elect to invest their dollars in small company stocks, buckle up because
it is going to be Mr. Toad’s wild ride. Yeehaw!

Let’s calculate one last probability before we leave this chapter. For the brave soul willing to endure the tumult
of a small-company stock portfolio, a reasonable question would be, “What is the likelihood that I will lose money
next year?” In other words, what’s the probability of realizing a return below zero percent?

We first determine how far away zero is from the mean. It is 0 — 16.3 =—16.3, or 16.3 percent below the mean.
Next, we standardize the distance by dividing by the standard deviation of 31.5 percent, -16.3 + 31.5 = 0.5175.
Zero percent is 0.5175 standard deviations below the mean of 16.3 percent. The 0.5175 distance is the z-score you
know and love from statistics. In general,

z-score = target
o
Next, we look up the z-score of 0.5175 on a standard normal cumulative distribution table or use Excel. Though
there are procedures to interpolate values not listed on the table, we will simply use the closest value, which is —
0.52. The probability of being 0.52 standard deviations below the mean next year is 0.3015. That means there is
about a 30 percent chance of realizing a small-company stock return of less than zero percent. Put another way,
there’s a 30 percent likelihood your portfolio will lose money next year.

Now consider an outcome on the upside. If you hold a small stock portfolio, what is the chance you will earn

20% or more next year? Begin by calculating the associated z-score.

z-score = 22163 _ 9.1175
31.5

The nearest value on the cumulative normal table is 0.12, with an associated probability of 0.5478. That’s the chance
an observation will land 0.12 standard deviations above the mean or lower. The table provides the area under a
standard normal distribution to the /eft of the given z-score. That’s not what we want. We’re trying to estimate how
likely it is that an observation will be 0.12 standard deviations above the mean or more. The area under the curve is
one. To get the probability of a small stock annual return of 20% or more, we subtract 0.5478 from one, which is

21


--- Page 22 ---
0.4522. Assuming normality of returns, there is a 45.22% chance the portfolio will generate a return of at least 20%
next year.

Since we determined the z-scores and probabilities for either losing money or doing better than 20%, we
conclude by combining the two cases. What’s the chance the portfolio will have a return that lands between 0% and
20%? That is, between standard deviations of —0.52 and 0.12, respectively? The probability of interest is the area
under the normal curve between the two z-scores. It is the probability of being below 0.12, 54.78%, minus the
probability of being below —0.52, 30.15%. That area is 54.78% minus 30.15% which is 24.63%. In other words,
about once every four years, a small company stock portfolio will realize an annual return between zero and twenty
percent.

Capital market history delivers the results we expected. We expect the riskless asset to cover expected inflation and
provide a real return to compensate for the burden of waiting to consume. Treasury bills do. Fixed-income securities
have many perils to varying degrees, including interest rate, credit, liquidity, and reinvestment risks. We expect
risk-averse bondholders will demand extra compensation to bear these significant economic bads. They do.
Stockholders hold the business enterprise’s riskiest position as the residual claimants. By definition, they face the
maximum uncertainty, so we expect them to reap handsome rewards for the wild volatility they will endure. The
data says stocks deliver enormous expected consumption, so great, in fact, it’s an empirical puzzle.

But let’s not lose sight of the end game here. We are trying to make good capital budgeting decisions, and if we
use discounted cash flow techniques, we need an appropriate required return. Capital market history tells us that the
return must be risk-adjusted. Suppose the project under consideration is about as risky as fixed-income. In that case,
the risk premium should be in the neighborhood of three percent per year on top of whatever Treasury bills currently
yield. If, instead, the project’s risk profile is similar to a stock, then tack on a hefty risk premium of eight to ten
percent. In the next chapter, we shift our perspective from looking back at history to peering forward into an
uncertain future. Along the way, we will develop a model that will help us better approximate the project’s
appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate beyond the broad brushstrokes capital market history affords.

22


