--- Page 1 ---
Chapter Ten

Modelling Risk and Its Reward

Looking back at capital market history provides convincing empirical evidence that market participants with notable
wealth at stake are risk-averse. The unambiguous conclusion is that there is a risk-reward tradeoff, a pillar of finance
that this book exposed you to as early as possible. We now shift our perspective from the past to the future. Investing
in a project or financial asset means choosing how to allocate scarce capital in the face of an unknown future. The
problem at this point is that we do not yet have a quantitative model that measures risk and predicts the expected
rewards. In other words, it’s one thing to say that bearing greater risk should produce more expected consumption
as compensation. It is an entirely different thing to forecast that accepting X additional units of risk should pay a
risk premium of Y expected basis points. The latter requires a model, which is the subject of this chapter.

We initially modeled uncertainty with the simple binomial model in Chapter Three. Recall the two assets we
considered then and their state-contingent payouts and returns.

0 1
$1 9.89%

Safety Asset $0.91
$1 9.89%

$2 129.89%
Risky Asset $0.87
$0 -100%
The probability of moving up or down was the same, fifty percent for each outcome. Given the probabilities, we
found the following expected values.

Payout Return
Safety Asset $1 9.89%
Risky Asset $1 14.94%

We saw that Risky compensates its owner with a risk premium for bearing the anticipated volatility that Safety does
not have. That volatility is easy enough to see from the range of state-contingent payouts and returns. The critical
question we left unanswered is this: how do we measure the risk? We answer the question presently. To do so, we
use the forward-looking variance of the returns as an initial measure of an asset’s expected volatility.

o =p (4-n) + pi(m-M) t-+P,(%-H)

We designate w as the asset’s expected return. Unlike the historical variance, which gives equal weight to each
squared deviation term, the equation above uses the probabilities as the weights. Squared deviation terms that are
more likely to occur have a larger impact on the variance than those that are less likely. The variance’s units are

1

Mark J. Laplante, Ph.D.
Copyright 2025. All rights reserved.
Distribution of this chapter without the written consent of the author is strictly prohibited.


--- Page 2 ---
squared percent, which are unintuitive units. The standard deviation is the square root of the variance and yields the
returns’ original units of percent. There is no variability in Safety’s state-contingent returns, so its variance and
standard deviation are zero. Let’s calculate Risky’s volatility.

o? =0.50(1.2989 — 0.1494)" +0.50(-1.00— 0.1494)” =1.3212

Risky’s variance is 1.3212 squared percent. Taking the square root, its standard deviation is 1.14943 percent in
decimal form, which in percentage form is 114.9% per step in the binomial model—risky indeed.

Let’s apply the framework to two risky stocks, American Airlines Group Inc. (AAL) and Exxon Mobil
Corporation (XOM), both industry leaders headquartered near Dallas, Texas. Consider two states of the world that
significantly impact both companies: crude oil trading at a low of $20 a barrel versus a high of $100. Exxon benefits
substantially from selling the oil it pumps out of the Gulf of Mexico at the high price, while its financial position
deteriorates at the low price. The reverse is true for American. The cost of jet fuel, one of the airline’s most
significant operating expenses, is highly correlated with the price of crude. Twenty-dollar crude will slash
American’s costs and boost its profits, while the high price will produce attention-getting losses. The table below
summarizes the situation and the companies’ state-contingent returns.

State Probability AAL XOM
$100-barrel 0.60 -6% 38%
$20-barrel 0.40 26%  -20%

Given the information above, we can calculate the stocks’ expected returns and volatilities. Here they are.

Haat, = 0.60 0.06 + 0.40 x 0.26 = 0.068

Ox, = 0.60(—0.06 — 0.068)" + 0.40(0.26 — 0.068)” = 0.024576

Ora, = V0.024576 = 0.156767

Hyon = 0.60% 0.38 + 0.40 x -0.20 = 0.148
G2om = 0.60(0.38— 0.148)’ +0.40(—0.20- 0.148)" = 0.080736

Oxo =-V0.080736 = 0.284141

American’s expected return is 6.80%, with anticipated volatility of 15.7% as measured by the standard deviation.
Exxon has an expected return of 14.8% and a standard deviation of 28.4%. They both have large standard deviations,
meaning neither looks anything like a Treasury bill. However, Exxon is nearly twice as volatile as American. This
is not terribly surprising. Exxon’s core business is discovering, pumping, and selling crude oil. In contrast, the price
of jet fuel is only one variable of many that impact American’s profitability. Consequently, it is less sensitive to oil
price shocks than Exxon.

Given the additional risk in this scenario, Exxon compensates its shareholders with a higher expected return than
American. Greater risk, greater reward, as you would expect. A cautionary note here. We are considering a single
risk: uncertainty about oil prices. The owners of both companies face myriad other risks that will influence the
expected returns of both stocks. We set those aside for the moment for illustrative purposes.

2


--- Page 3 ---
Heeding the old adage, don’t put all your eggs in one basket, you realize that you do not have any special
forecasting skills about crude prices and decide to spread your risk by purchasing both stocks. You have $20
thousand to invest and allocate $10 thousand to each stock. You created a portfolio, a collection of assets, in this
case, half American and half Exxon. Portfolio weights are the fractions of the total investment you allocate to each
asset class. It is easy enough to recognize that your portfolio weights are 50/50, but let’s rigorously define portfolio
weights for future applications. The portfolio weight of asset i, part of a portfolio with m assets, is the dollars
invested in 7 divided by the total invested dollars.

dollars invested in asset i

i

~ total dollars invested in the portfolio

wy, = 810,000 in AAL _
Al“ $20,000 invested

wy... 810,000 in XOM _ 4 <5
XOM “$20,000 invested

Accordingly, the portfolio weights must sum to one to account for all the invested capital, as shown below.

l=wt+w,+--+w,,
In our example,

1= Waar + xo

1=0.50+ 0.50

The seemingly simple portfolio you create with half your money in each stock to start is an equally-weighted
portfolio. Easy enough, right? Not so much. Though easy to construct initially, equally-weighted portfolios are
costly to maintain. For example, after a trading day, suppose American goes up while Exxon falls, which results in
the portfolio becoming 53% American and 47% Exxon. You now have more exposure to American than you would
like and must sell some to purchase Exxon shares. To maintain your 50-50 target asset allocation, you must regularly
rebalance your portfolio, incurring transaction costs each time you do so. To avoid this, many institutional investors
adopt alternative portfolio weighting strategies that do not require the trading activity an equally-weighted portfolio
necessitates. We will have more to say about these portfolios later in the chapter. Returning to our fossil fuel-
dependent companies, we use the portfolio weights and the state-contingent returns of the individual stocks to
calculate the portfolio’s state-contingent returns.

Ths = Waar *Trars + Wxom * "xom,s

r, = 0.50 x —0.06 + 0.50 x 0.38 = 0.160

$100
Ty.s29 = 0.50 x 0.26 + 0.50 x -0.20 = 0.030

Exxon’s sensitivity to oil prices partially translates to the portfolio. It performs best when the cost of a barrel is high
and worst when it is low. With the state-contingent returns in hand, we can calculate the portfolio’s expected return
and volatility. They are as follows.


--- Page 4 ---
1, , = 0.60 x 0.16 + 0.40x 0.03 = 0.108
o? =0.60(0.16-0.108)' + 0.40(0.03 0.108)" = 0.004056

o,, = 0.004056 = 0.063687

The table below summarizes the expected returns and standard deviations for American, Exxon, and the 50-50

portfolio.
AAL XOM 50-50
expected return 6.80% 14.8% 10.8%
anticipated volatility 15.7% 28.4% 6.4%

The table above demonstrates that the portfolio’s expected return is a linear combination of the expected returns of
American and Exxon, where the relative investments act as weights. You can see this in the equations below.

Thu = Waar *T rate + Wxom * Txomu

Tyg = 0.50 x 0.068 + 0.50 x 0.148 = 0.108

This makes sense. If, on average, half your money earns 6.8% while the other half produces 14.8%, then the
portfolio should pay the midpoint of 10.8%. If you tilt more money toward Exxon, your portfolio’s expected return
will move toward Exxon’s 14.8%.

The anticipated volatility is the table’s fascinating result. The 50-50 portfolio’s standard deviation is /ess than
those of the individual assets that constitute it, 6.4% versus 15.7% and 28.4%, respectively. In fact, it is an order of
magnitude smaller than the volatilities of American and Exxon. The conclusion is both surprising and profound.
While the portfolio’s expected return is a linear combination of the assets’ expected returns, the portfolio’s standard
deviation is not. How can this be? Revisiting the stocks’ state-contingent returns provides the key insight.

State Probability AAL XOM
$100-barrel 0.60 -6% 38%
$20-barrel 0.40 26%  -20%

When the oil price is high, Exxon is up, and American is down. And when the cost is low, American is up, and
Exxon is down. With both stocks constituting the portfolio, their opposing comovements cancel each other to a
certain extent. The net effect dampens the portfolio’s overall volatility. This phenomenon is the heart of
diversification. Investors can benefit from diversification by assembling a portfolio of assets that do not move alike.
By doing so, the investor reduces the volatility they face without a commensurate reduction in the portfolio’s
expected return. As a result, diversification directly impacts the investor’s risk-reward tradeoff. She can achieve a
higher reward for a given level of risk or bear less risk for a given reward. From either perspective, the investor
benefits from diversification by changing the tradeoffs between the economic bad, the risk, and the economic good
for bearing it, the return. In short, diversification provides the investor with a desirable and tasty free lunch.

We can see the importance of asset comovements and their effect on the portfolio’s volatility by carefully
examining the equation for the portfolio’s variance. It is,

22 2 2
Oo = WaarOaar + WxomPxom + 2Waar Paar WxomOxom COM(Taat »7xom )

4


--- Page 5 ---
o, = 0.50° x 0.024576 + 0.50" x 0.080736 + 2 x 0.50 x 0.156767 x 0.50 x 0.284141 x(-1) = 0.004056

Oo; = 0.006144 + 0.020184 -—0.022272 =0.004056
AAL XOM_ comovement

While perhaps initially intimidating, the equations above provide crucial and intuitive insights into the factors
influencing a portfolio’s risk. First, the riskiness of the assets in the portfolio, measured by the variances and
standard deviations, impacts the riskiness of the portfolio. No surprise there. We saw this in the history of U.S.
capital markets. Riskier assets held, such as small company stocks, give you a riskier portfolio. Hold less risky
Treasurys, and you get a portfolio that’s an order of magnitude less volatile, as measured by the annual standard
deviation, than holding small company stocks.

Second, as you would expect, the assets’ portfolio weights, wm, should factor into the portfolio’s variance, and
they do. In the example, it’s a 50-50 portfolio, but suppose the investor first increases their exposure to American
by increasing its allocation to 90%, then switches it to 90% Exxon. The table below summarizes the results.

AAL 90-10 50-50 10-90 XOM
variance, %? 245.8 127.0 40.6 503.4 807.4
standard deviation, % 15.7 11.3 6.4 22.4 28.4

As the portfolio weight increases for a particular asset, the portfolio’s volatility moves towards its value. It must.
You can see this in the extreme. As the investor increases their exposure to American, the portfolio more closely
mimics the movements of American shares. In the limit, as American’s portfolio weight approaches one, the

20?

“portfolio’s” volatility converges on American’s. Notably, moving away from the 50-50 portfolio increases its risk,
indicating the investor will bear more risk if they adopt less diversified allocations.

Third, the portfolio’s variance is a function of the correlation between the two stocks. The correlation measures
statistical relatedness, ranging from negative one to one. Once time resolves the uncertainty about the cost of a
barrel of oil, the state-contingent returns of American and Exxon are perfectly negatively correlated. Their
correlation coefficient is negative one, which appears in the comovement component of the equations above. The
comovement term is why the 50-50 portfolio is not a linear combination of the risks of the assets in the portfolio.
It’s why the portfolio is less risky than both American and Exxon individually.

In 1952, the Journal of Finance published Portfolio Selection by Harry Markowitz, who later became a Nobel
laureate. Arguably, it is the most important paper ever written in financial economics. In it, Harry extended the two-
asset portfolio you just learned to many assets, wherein he emphasized the importance of the assets’ correlation
structure in reducing the portfolio’s risk. The moral of his story and the American-Exxon portfolio above is that if
you want to maximize the risk-reducing benefits of diversification, add assets to your portfolio that don’t move
alike. In other words, include assets that are poorly correlated and, better still, negatively correlated ones, like
American and Exxon. With Portfolio Selection, Modern Portfolio Theory was born, an idea founded on the impact
asset correlations have on a portfolio’s variance. The paper forever transformed and enlightened how investors think
about the risk-reward tradeoff.

The American-Exxon example illustrates the importance of the correlation term to a portfolio’s variance and
standard deviation. It is a highly stylized illustration based on two realizable states for oil prices in which the asset’s
state-contingent returns are perfectly negatively correlated. Their negative comovement has enormous
diversification benefits. In fact, if the investor searches for the asset allocation that minimizes the portfolio’s
volatility, they will find that a mix of 64.4% AAL and 35.6% XOM results in a zero standard deviation. Essentially,


--- Page 6 ---
the investor can synthetically create a riskless asset from two risky ones. If the portfolio’s expected return differs
from the yield on a T-bill, arbitrage opportunities may exist—all due to a correlation coefficient of negative one.

However, the companies face many shared and unique risks beyond oil price shocks. Accordingly, their returns
may be positively correlated or uncorrelated in those states. For example, both stock returns will likely drop if
Congress passes stricter carbon emissions legislation. They will be highly correlated in such a state, and their
diversification benefits will be limited. Alternatively, American faces far greater risks from a pilot’s union strike
and terrorist hijacking than does Exxon. If either possibility becomes a reality, American’s share price will likely
change while Exxon’s will not. Their comovements disconnect, and their unrelatedness will benefit the investor
who holds both in their portfolio. Given these additional risks and myriad unmentioned others, the historical
correlation between American and Exxon is 0.088. They have a weak positive relation, and an investor would reap
diversification benefits by holding both in her portfolio.

As we’ve seen, forming portfolios can significantly reduce investors’ volatility, but adding assets to the mix
does not guarantee lower risk. For example, suppose you add Chevron Corporation (CVX) to your American and
Exxon holdings. Consider the assets’ state-contingent returns below.

State Probability AAL XOM CVX
$100-barrel 0.60 -6% 38% 39%
$20-barrel 0.40 26% -20% -21%

Unsurprisingly, the oil stocks have highly correlated returns. Their correlation coefficient is one. Adding Chevron
does not further diversify the investor; just the opposite. It is a redundant asset because it moves in lockstep with
Exxon. As a result, the portfolio’s standard deviation increases from 6.4% to 14%. Holding Chevron makes the
portfolio more sensitive to oil price shocks, not less. Adding twenty-five additional energy companies will only
make things worse. That’s not diversification. On the contrary, it’s taking a speculative position about future oil
prices. In contrast, holding stocks from twenty-five different industries, such as greeting cards, optical instruments,
jewelry, wholesale dental equipment, finance services, motion pictures, and skilled nursing care facilities, will go a
long way to diversify the risk of oil price surprises.

Adding assets to a portfolio that are not perfectly correlated will improve its diversification. To illustrate the
benefits of increasing the number of securities held, consider the following experiment. Randomly pick a single
stock listed on the NYSE and calculate the average standard deviation of returns. Then, form an equally weighted
portfolio of two NYSE stocks, calculate its average standard deviation of returns, and compare it to the volatility of
the single stock. Repeat the procedure by consecutively increasing the stocks in the equally weighted portfolio. Stop
when you reach one thousand randomly chosen stocks. The table below contains the experiment’s results.

Number of Stocks Average Standard Deviation _ Ratio of Portfolio to Single
in Portfolio of Annual Portfolio Returns Stock Standard Deviation

1 49.24% 1.00

2 37.36 0.76

3 29.69 0.60

8 24.98 0.51

10 23.93 0.49

20 21.68 0.44

30 20.87 0.42

50 20.20 0.41
100 19.69 0.40


--- Page 7 ---
500 19.27 0.391
1,000 19.21 0.390

The average single stock has an annual standard deviation of returns of about 49%. Given capital market history,
that’s about 1.5 times the volatility of the small company stock portfolio, the riskiest asset class we considered. If
the stock is normally distributed, there is a 99% likelihood that its return will fall somewhere between the
shareholder getting wiped out and exceeding their expected return by 150% next year. The data supports the adage
that putting all your eggs in one basket, in this case, dollars in a single stock, is an extremely risky business and will
be the benchmark for the rest of the table.

The standard deviation drops to 37% for the two-stock portfolio. From the third column, the two-stock portfolio
has only 76% of the volatility compared to the single stock. In other words, forming a 50-50 portfolio by throwing
two darts at the NYSE listings in the Wall Street Journal reduces the economic bad by 24%. That’s an impressive
risk reduction from such a simple strategy. Why not keep going? You throw three, eight, then ten darts. You keep
throwing until you reach a thousand.

Three significant patterns emerge from the exercise. First, each time you increase the number of stocks held, the
portfolio’s standard deviation falls. Second, as you increase the number of stocks, the risk-reducing benefits of
diversification diminish. As mentioned, doubling from one to two stocks reduces the average standard deviation by
24%, but doubling from fifty to one hundred stocks produces only a minuscule one percent improvement. Third,
there are limits to diversification. Doubling from five hundred to one thousand stocks is beneficial, but almost
imperceptibly so. The process is clearly approaching an asymptote. To summarize, increasing the number of stocks
in a portfolio has positive but diminishing marginal diversification benefits that will reduce but not eliminate the
volatility. The figure below plots the results.

50

e

49.2
x
°* 40 2
FE 374 3
2 3
S 30 e a
5 29.7 iS
3 26.6 e
> 23.9 e

e

3B 2 217 - oi . e ry e
ie 209 a9 ae
g 7 19.3 19.2 19.0
uo}
g
3
nH 10

1 2 4 6 10 20 30 50 100 500 1,000 Market

Stocks in portfolio

The figure vividly illustrates that an investor can eliminate a substantial proportion of a portfolio’s volatility
through diversification, hence the name diversifiable risk. And yet, significant risk remains that is
nondiversifiable. Theoretically, an investor achieves the asymptotic minimum volatility by exhausting all
opportunities to diversify further. Once she holds every risky asset, there’s nothing left to chuck in. We call the

7


--- Page 8 ---
maximally diversified portfolio the market portfolio. It exists only in financial theory because no one can hold it
in practice. Holding the true market portfolio is impossible because many private risky assets do not have tradeable
claims that the general public can hold. Examples include private homes, sole proprietorships, jewelry, personal
vehicles, and art, to name a few. As much as you might want to diversify your portfolio by holding a tiny proportion
of your neighbor’s Jackson Pollock painting, say a hundred-thousandth of its value, you can’t!. As a consequence,
broadly diversified stock portfolios such as the S&P500 and the NASDAQ Composite Index, among others, serve
as proxies for the market portfolio.

The central question to understanding the risk-reward tradeoff is this: What risks does holding the market
portfolio eliminate and not? What risks are diversifiable and nondiversifiable? To answer these questions, consider
what risks American and Exxon face beyond those already mentioned. American might crash a plane due to poor
maintenance. Congress could increase the corporate tax rate. Exxon might discover a massive deposit of white
hydrogen, a highly desirable fossil fuel for fighting climate change. An international treaty on travel gives American
access to new and highly profitable routes. The Fed announces that inflation should remain low and predictable for
the next two years. A drunken Exxon skipper runs a supertanker aground, causing a devastating oil spill in Alaska.
These companies face these possibilities and numerous other dimensions every day in order to survive.

So, how do these risks relate to the market portfolio? The investors holding the market do not care a whit about
the pilot’s strike, an isolated hijacking or plane crash, a hydrogen discovery, a treaty, or an oil spill. These events,
as impactful as they may be for American and Exxon shareholders, do not correlate with the other asset returns in
the market portfolio. They affect American and Exxon and perhaps a small circle of competitors and suppliers, but
they mean nothing to nearly every other shareholder in the universe. For example, American boosting profits by
flying passengers between Ulaanbaatar and Dushanbe will not change the expected future cash flows of Microsoft,
CIGNA, Mattel, and the many other thousands of publicly traded companies. These surprises generate uncorrelated
positive and negative error terms for the respective individual expected returns. Summing these errors up over the
thousands of securities held in the market portfolio, the average error will be zero. In short, investors holding the
market don’t care about these risks because they have no average impact on the portfolio’s value. We call these
diversifiable risks asset-specific, unique, idiosyncratic, and unsystematic risks because they do not change values
beyond a single or a small number of assets.

As for the oil price shocks, emissions legislation, a hijacking that foretells the start of a global geopolitical
struggle, tax increases, and stable inflation, these are the kinds of surprises that get the attention of market holders.
These events impact the expected future cash flows of nearly every business in the economy and their prices. Of
course, there will be winners and losers in each realized state. Though the stock price responses may differ, they
move for the same reason. In other words, a tax increase and stable inflation result in highly correlated error terms
that will not cancel each other out over a portfolio with many assets. As a result, the portfolio’s value will change
upon such revelations. Other events that generated correlated asset price changes include information about
economic output, productivity, unemployment, interest rates, elections, regulatory and statutory changes, Supreme
Court decisions, trade agreements, and armed conflict. These factors are nondiversifiable because they will generate
correlated price impacts no matter how many assets the investor holds. We also call these market and systematic

1 Masterworks.com sells shares that have a claim on art by Banksy, Monet, Warhol, and many others. It essentially provides
art ETFs. The lesson is, if there’s sufficient demand for an asset that allows for speculation or diversification, the market will
deliver it.


--- Page 9 ---
risks. The change in the price of a barrel of oil that motivated our earlier examples, and energy prices in general, is
a systematic risk.

With these differential risks in mind, consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or simply the Dow
or Industrials. It is a portfolio of thirty companies considered market leaders in their respective industries. Investors
have kept an eye on the Dow every day since 1885. The Dow is a price-weighted index not value-weighted, so the
company with the highest stock price gets the most weight, while the lowest stock price has the least. If the index
used value-weighting, NVIDIA would be number one with a current market capitalization of nearly $5 trillion
instead of ranking twenty-third on its price. Here is the current list of companies ranked from the largest asset
allocation to the smallest.

Company Ticker Industry
3M Company NYSE: MMM conglomerate
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. NYSE: GS financial services
UnitedHealth Group Incorporated NYSE: UNH healthcare
Microsoft Corporation NASDAQ: MSFT information technology
The Home Depot, Inc. NYSE: HD home improvement
Caterpillar Inc. NYSE: CAT construction and mining
The Sherwin-Williams Corporation NYSE: SHW materials
salesforce.com, inc. NYSE: CRM information technology
Visa Inc. NYSE: V financial services
American Express Company NYSE: AXP financial services
McDonald’s Corporation NYSE: MCD food
Amgen Inc. NASDAQ: AMGN biopharmaceutical
J.P.Morgan Chase & Co. NYSE: JPM financial services
Apple Inc. NASDAQ: AAPL information technology
The Travelers Companies, Inc. NYSE: TRV insurance
International Business Machines Corporation NYSE: IBM information technology
Amazon.com, Inc. NASAQ: AMZN e-commerce
Honeywell International Inc. NASDAQ: HON conglomerate
The Boeing Company NYSE: BA aerospace and defense
The Procter & Gamble Company NYSE: PG fast-moving consumer goods
Chevron Corporation NYSE: CVX petroleum
Johnson & Johnson NYSE: JNJ pharmaceutical
NVIDIA Corporation NASDAQ: NVDA semiconductor
The Walt Disney Company NYSE: DIS broadcasting and entertainment
Merck & Co., Inc. NYSE: MRK pharmaceutical
Walmart Inc. NYSE: WMT retailing
Nike, Inc. NYSE: NKE clothing
The Coca-Cola Company NYSE: KO drink
Cisco Systems, Inc. NASDAQ: CSCO information technology
Verizon Communications Inc. NYSE: VZ telecommunications


--- Page 10 ---
As we saw in our diversification experiment earlier, on average, a portfolio of thirty stocks eliminates 42% of
the volatility compared to holding a single stock. But those securities were randomly chosen and had equal portfolio
weights. The companies in the Dow are selected because they are prominent firms in many different industries, as
you can see in the table above. In addition, the index is price-weighted, not equally weighted. The net effect is that
the Dow offers superior diversification benefits. While the many industries represented have systematic risk
exposures, it is improbable that they will move in lockstep for any given market shock.

For example, a systemic interest rate surprise will likely affect all the Dow companies, but there will be
differential impacts. Significant interest rate changes will have an outsized influence on the financial services and
insurance companies and almost none on the food, retailing, chemical, and drink industries. Simply put, the
companies won’t move alike, and the investor will reap the risk-reducing benefits of diversification. Having said
that, the Dow is not maximally diversified. It holds only thirty stocks and over-represents some industries, namely
financial and technology companies, which are more than a third of the constituents.

In addition, having thirty stocks reduces the investor’s exposure to uncorrelated asset-specific shocks, but it is
far from eliminating them. A Wall Street Journal quote makes the point: “Boeing sliced 153 points from the Dow
Jones Industrial Average.” Why? Boeing shares tumbled 5% after a second deadly crash of its latest 737 MAX
aircraft. That’s a terrible idiosyncratic event for Boeing, but it is entirely uncorrelated with the expected future cash
flows of the other Dow members. Only in the most far-fetched stories can one imagine two 737 crashes changing
burger sales at McDonald’s. And what Boeing takes away from the Dow with one hand, it gives back with the other,
as this WSJ headline attests: “Thank Boeing for the Dow’s Latest Rise.” The reason this time? British Airways
signed a letter expressing its intent to purchase 200 737 MAX aircraft several months after the fatal crashes, a
significant vote of confidence by British Airways in Boeing. The conclusion is that investors bear some diversifiable
risk when they hold the Dow. With so few stocks, an uncorrelated awesome or abominable day for one firm can
move the value of the entire portfolio, and that’s risky.

Stepping away from our discussion about diversifiable versus nondiversifiable risks briefly, a couple of further
comments bear mentioning. First, from the table above, it’s clear that the stocks listed on the NYSE dominate those
on NASDAQ. This highlights a widely held perception that, in general, NYSE companies are more prestigious than
those on NASDAQ. Apple and Microsoft are glaring exceptions, but the perception persists nonetheless.

Second, compare the current members of this exclusive club to some of the companies at its inception. They
include the American Cotton Oil, Sugar, and Tobacco Companies. The U.S. Leather and Rubber Companies were
at the start as well. So, too, were the Chicago Gas, National Lead, Tennessee Coal & Iron, and Distilling & Cattle
Feeding Companies. Notably, General Electric was there at the beginning of the DJIA. All were considered giants
in their sectors. Only General Electric survived, and the Dow Jones Company removed it from the index in 2018.

The evolution of the Dow Jones Industrial Average mirrors the changes in the U.S. economy. The founding
companies primarily produced raw materials for manufacturing processes. Now, the more ephemeral financial and
technology industries dominate the index. The biopharmaceutical, aerospace, semiconductor, and broadcasting
industries of today were unimaginable fantasies in the 1800s. The transformation of the Dow calls to mind the work
of Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter. He characterized capitalism as a process of creative destruction. “[A]
process of industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly
destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one.” The DJIA embodies the creative destruction process and
will continue to do so as long as American entrepreneurs chase big money-making ideas.

10


--- Page 11 ---
Returning to risk, our measures of stock volatility, the variance and standard deviation, capture all underlying
reasons for price changes. For American, the price variability results from plane crashes, increased taxes, beneficial
treaties, and stable price levels. For Exxon, it’s resource discovery, increased taxes, stable price levels, and drunken
sailors. In both cases, the standard volatility measures capture stock movement for a// reasons, both unsystematic
and systematic. The conclusion is that the variance and standard deviation measure the total risk for individual
securities.

In contrast, only nondiversifiable events change the market’s value. Idiosyncratic events don’t move the needle
and are irrelevant. Therefore, the market’s variance and standard deviation entirely reflect systemic risks and
nothing but systemic risks.

An unskilled investor holding the market portfolio eliminates about 60% of the risk relative to the average single
stock. That’s ridding oneself of 60% of the economic bad without a commensurate reduction in the economic good,
the expected return. A risk-averse investor should find such an opportunity appealing. However, perhaps it is costly
to do, and the transaction costs prevent the risk-averse investor from eating this free lunch. But is it free? What does
it cost to diversify away unsystematic risk? In today’s highly competitive and efficient U.S. capital markets, one
can hold the entire market through the Vanguard Total Stock Market Index Fund ETF (VTI), which holds 3,793
companies, as cheaply as buying only shares of Sysco Corporation. In fact, it will be cheaper to own the stock
market if you let Vanguard reinvest your dividends rather than attempting to reinvest Sysco’s dividends on your
own’.

An investor without financial acumen can costlessly eliminate the idiosyncratic risk from their portfolio. What
remains is the market risk, which they cannot avoid costlessly. The systematic risk principle states that the market
rewards investors for bearing risks they can’t avoid through diversification and not for the ones they can. In other
words, investors earn basis points for accepting systematic risk and not a penny for any asset-specific risk they
foolishly take on. With the systematic risk principle in mind, consider the annual standard deviation of returns for
the Total Stock Market Index and Sysco. They are 15.8% and 22.2%, respectively, for twenty years of monthly
data. Should the securities’ expected returns be a function of the standard deviations or something else?

The market’s standard deviation only incorporates price movements that result from systemic events, so it is an
acceptable measure of the market’s risk. In contrast, Sysco’s 22.2% incorporates market movements and events
that only impact Sysco. The standard deviation captures the total risk of owning Sysco shares. From a portfolio
perspective, Sysco’s idiosyncratic risk is irrelevant. It is nothing more than independent white noise that will cancel,
and be canceled by, the independent white noise produced by the portfolio’s other assets. What is relevant to the
investor is the volatility Sysco brings to the portfolio, which does not wash out. That’s Sysco’s marginal contribution
to the portfolio’s systematic risk.

By building on the pioneering work of Harry Markowitz, Nobel Laureate William Sharpe, and Jack Treynor
independently developed models that distinguish the importance of systematic from unsystematic risks from a
portfolio perspective. The result of their research is the beta coefficient. It is a measure of an asset’s sensitivity to
systematic risks. For any asset i, it is

? Full disclosure. Sysco has a dividend reinvest plan (DRIP) where the company will reinvest your dividends in their stock
on your behalf to save you the expense. That’s great, but does not help you should you wish to reinvest the dividends in a
different company.

11


--- Page 12 ---
To understand how beta works, begin with the denominator. The market’s volatility was 15.8% per year for the
VTI in the sample period. The market portfolio holds every asset, so one can think of it as an average of all its
investments. Thinking of the market portfolio as the average risky asset in the economy is a fruitful interpretation.
Combining this view with the fact that the market’s standard deviation of returns reflects only systemic events, we
can interpret the denominator as a measure of the average asset’s sensitivity to market risk. The average asset’s
nondiversifiable risk is the equation’s benchmark or reference point.

Now, turn your attention to the numerator. It contains asset i’s standard deviation, its total risk. For an individual
stock, it has systematic and unsystematic components. What matters for the portfolio’s risk is only the systemic
portion. That’s where the correlation coefficient enters the story. The correlation captures the statistical relatedness
between market returns and those of i. The logic is straightforward. Systematic events produce realized market
returns, and the correlation measures when the market and i move for the same reason. In that case, it captures when
i moves due to nondiversifiable shocks.

Beta’s numerator is the product of the asset’s total risk and the correlation between the asset and market returns.
In doing so, the correlation coefficient rescales the asset’s standard deviation, its total risk, to extract the systematic
portion. For example, suppose the correlation is one. That means the asset’s price only moves in response to market
movements, in which case 100% of the total risk is systemic. In contrast, if the correlation is zero, none of the total
risk is systematic. Such an asset only moves for idiosyncratic reasons. The product leaves asset i’s sensitivity to
systematic risk in its beta’s numerator.

Putting it all together, beta measures i’s sensitivity to market risk in the numerator and that of the average asset
in the denominator. Therefore, the beta coefficient is a unitless measure of relative systematic risk. If an asset moves
more than the average because of a market event, its beta will be greater than one. In contrast, if an asset is less
sensitive to market shocks, its beta will be less than one. Two special cases bear mentioning. First, applying the
beta’s definition to a riskless Treasury bill, we see that the T-bill’s beta is zero.

_ Oy COIK (Ty sty) 0x0_

By = 0

ou Ou

A treasury pays the same face value in all states, so its standard deviation of state-contingent returns is zero. In
addition, market returns vary across states, while those of a T-bill do not, so the correlation between them is zero.
We conclude that, by definition, a riskless security has a zero beta.

Second, the beta of the market portfolio and its proxies must be one, as you can see below.

By, = Oy, COIT (Ty Ty) —ouxl_,

ou ou

A riskless asset has a zero beta, and the market’s beta is one. Now consider the beta of an individual stock.
Suppose the market’s annual standard deviation of returns is 20%. Further, American Electric Power’s (AEP)
standard deviation is 30%, while its correlation with the market is 0.40. Given this information, we calculate AEP’s
beta below.
0.3x0.40 0.12 _

———_ =—-= 0.60
0.20 0.20

Pree =

12


--- Page 13 ---
As measured by the correlation coefficient, forty percent of AEP’s total risk is systematic. Comparing AEP’s
systematic risk in the numerator to the market’s sensitivity to systematic shocks in the denominator, the company
only has sixty percent of the sensitivity to market movements as the average asset. Thus, its stock beta is 0.60. AEP
has market risk, but significantly less than the market. That’s not surprising. While we expect electrical consumption
to vary positively with economic output, we do not expect it to fluctuate wildly due to changes in interest rates,
inflation, and trade wars. AEP’s smallish positive beta reflects these facts.

Theoretically, the beta coefficient is forward-looking. It is a function of the anticipated volatility of the asset and
the market and their expected comovement in the future. Predicting future state-contingent outcomes and their
associated probabilities is difficult, if not impossible. It is common practice to estimate the beta coefficient with an
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression using past data, typically five years of monthly returns, and hope the future
looks like the past. Note that it is not a coincidence that we call both an asset’s systematic risk coefficient and a
regression’s slope coefficient beta. The results for Sysco and VTI as the market proxy are below.

beta intercept
coefficients 0.65 0.002
t-statistic 6.65 0.45

p-value <0.00001 0.327
R-squared 0.272

You can see the line of best fit in the scatterplot below.

20%

15%

10%

10%

-10%

Sysco returns, monthly %

-15%

Market return, monthly %

Sysco’s estimated beta is 0.65, which is similar to American Electric Power’s and for largely the same reasons.
Sysco delivers food to restaurants, hotels, and cafeterias. While eating out may vary due to population growth and
changes in gross domestic product, it does vary much for other nondiversifiable reasons. With a t-stat of 6.65, we
reject the null hypothesis that there is no relation between Sysco and the market at better than the 1% confidence
level. The intercept is indistinguishable from zero. What is very interesting is the regression’s R-squared. It indicates
that variation in market returns only explains 27.2% of the variation in Sysco’s stock returns. In other words, about

13


--- Page 14 ---
27% of Sysco’s total risk is systematic, while the remaining 73% is unique to Sysco. Sysco has a lot of idiosyncratic
risk.

One notable feature of the figure is that the line is upward-sloping at less than a 45-degree angle, indicating
Sysco’s beta is positive and less than one. A striking feature of the scatterplot is that the data don’t cluster tightly
around the line. Yes, there appears to be a positive relationship between the market and Sysco, but quite a few
observations are relatively distant from the line. This feature of the scatterplot is why the R-squared is so low.
There’s a lot of variation in Sysco that is unrelated to the market. As data becomes more densely packed around the
line, the regression’s R-square will increase, as will the proportion of a stock’s total risk due to systemic events.

To highlight this, consider the scatterplot for two market proxies, the VTI and S&P500, below. The slope
coefficient estimate is 0.973 with a ¢-stat of 116.4. The regression’s R-squared is 99.1%, which explains the tight
clustering of the data points around the line of best fit in the figure. A comparison of the two scatterplots shows us
that most of Sysco’s stock price volatility is not due to market-moving surprises, while the systematic risk of the
S&P500 is almost entirely due to such nondiversifiable perturbations.

15.0%

10.0%

S

monthly %

0.0%,

-15.0% 0% 5.0% 10.0% 15.0%

SPY return,

-10.0%

-15.0%
VTI return, monthly %

Only insiders with crystal balls and fools hold individual securities. Everybody else holds portfolios. It’s worth
mentioning that this is true even for most speculators, who typically calculate an optimal bet size that prevents them
from putting all their eggs in one basket. Consequently, we want to know how the systematic risks of the portfolio’s
securities contribute to that portfolio’s market risk. It’s a simple and intuitive result. A portfolio’s beta is the value-
weighted average of the asset betas that constitute it. Here is the equation.

B, =W Ah, +w,f, +--+w,B,

For example, consider the following asset allocations and betas for some companies mentioned in this chapter.

Company beta % of portfolio
American 1.58 25
Chevron 1.10 30

14


--- Page 15 ---
Mattel 1.13 25
Microsoft 0.90 20
100%
We calculate the portfolio’s beta below.

B, =9.25x1.58 + 0.301.104 0.25 x1.13+0.2x 0.9 =1.1875

The weighted average of the stock betas produces a portfolio beta of 1.19. The Vanguard Total Stock Market Index
has a beta of 1.000, as you expect. So, our four-company portfolio, on average, has about nineteen percent more
movement than the market due to systemic surprises. We expect this because 80% of the portfolio is more sensitive
than the market, while only 20% is less so. The total effect of the portfolio weights and stock betas results in a
portfolio that has more nondiversifiable risk than the market portfolio. Of course, the portfolio is far from exhausting
further opportunities for diversification. Accordingly, an investor holding it will bear substantial, uncompensated,
asset-specific risk.

We now set about establishing the functional relationship between an asset’s systematic risk measured by beta, the
economic bad, and reward for bearing it in basis points, the economic good. We begin with the conjecture that in
equilibrium, all assets have the same reward-to-risk ratio in a semistrong form efficient market. In order to reduce
clutter, we use the mu subscript to indicate an expected value. For example, rv, is the expected return on the market
portfolio. Equation (1) summarizes the conjecture below.

Tau Tr lu 7"

B Bu ”

The betas measure the systematic risks in the denominators. The numerators contain risk-premia, the expected
returns above and beyond the riskless rate of return. The numerators measure the compensation for bearing the risks
in the denominators. All else equal, market participants would prefer greater rewards in the numerators and lower
risks in the denominators. The ratio measures how much compensation an investor receives per unit of risk borne.
Again, the market plays the benchmark role of the average asset. Equation 1 says that in equilibrium, compensation
per unit of risk for any asset should equal that of the average asset. In other words, the economic good-to-bad ratio
should be the same for all assets.

Suppose the equality does not hold. What would follow? We illustrate the possibilities with General Mills, Inc.
(GIS) and Royal Caribbean Cruises, Ltd. (RCL). General Mills has a stock beta of 0.23, and Royal Caribbean’s is
2.48. As measured by beta, they have risks at opposite ends of the spectrum. Assume the following disequilibrium
arises.

Tosa — "7 > Tuy — "7 > ReLu

Bas Bu Beer

-"

Assume a riskless rate of 3.4% and substitute.

ToIsu -3.4% s Twn -3.4% 5 Tectu —3.4%

0.23 1 2.48



--- Page 16 ---
The market’s expected return is an average of thousands of expected returns. The prices of those thousands of
underlying assets will not change because there’s something wonky going on with General Mills and Royal
Caribbean stock prices. The expected return on the market isn’t going to budge an inch, or a basis point in this case.
The Fed will not allow the riskless rate to adjust either. To regain equilibrium, the expected returns of the individual
stocks must adjust.

To see how we begin with General Mills. General Mills’ per-unit compensation for risk is higher than the average
asset. For risk-averse investors, getting more bps for the same unit of risk borne would undoubtedly be attractive.
Why is it so appealing? Because its stock price is too low, it generates an abnormally high expected return.
Assuming the mispricing results from public information, profit-seeking traders will act quickly to go long General
Mills in a semistrong efficient market. The excess demand will promptly bid up the stock price until it returns to its
fair price. As it rises, the expected return and reward-to-risk ratio will fall. Net buying pressure will cease when
risk-averse traders become indifferent when the compensation for risk General Mills pays and that of the average
asset are the same. The trading activity results in reestablishing the equilibrium condition below.

Vrs —3-4% _ Ty, -3.4%
0.23 1

It’s a similar story for Royal Caribbean, but in reverse. Its per-unit compensation for risk is lower than the
average asset. Receiving fewer bps for the same unit of risk borne is a lousy deal for risk-averse traders. The root
of the problem is that RCL’s stock price is too high, yielding an expected return that is unduly low. Again, assuming
the mispricing results from public information, profit-seeking traders will either dump RCL from their portfolios or
short it. The excess supply from the two sources will quickly drive the price down. How low will it go? Until it
returns to its fair price. Because the price drops, the expected return and reward-to-risk ratio will rise. Net selling
pressure ends when indifference grips the risk-averse traders. Once again, trading activity reestablishes the
equilibrium condition below.

Fie 34% _ 7 Faciy =3.4%
1 2.48

In a semistrong efficient market with colossal profit incentives to collect, process, and trade on public
information to capture the abnormal returns mispricing produces, we should see the following relations when the
markets clear.

Tosa "pT Tp TROL

Bais Bu Brew

-"

Moving forward, we assume that traders maintain the equilibrium. Recognizing the market beta is one, and with
a bit of algebra, we rewrite Equation | as,

hu =" + B(vu-)

The equation above is the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). The model hypothesizes that any asset’s
expected return is a function of three factors. It starts with the riskless rate compensating the investor for the
anticipated erosion of purchasing power due to inflation. In addition, as we speculated in Chapter Three and saw in

16


--- Page 17 ---
U.S. capital market history, Treasury bills cover a little bit more than inflation to pay the investor for waiting for
their consumption.

The CAPM suggests that an asset’s expected return is also a function of the expected return on the market,
specifically, the market risk premium. The market risk premium is the economy’s average compensation to bear
systematic risk. Notably, the CAPM predicts that the asset’s systematic risk, as measured by its beta influences the
expected return. The asset’s beta coefficient scales up or down the market risk premium. The asset’s risk premium
is the product of its beta and the average payment for bearing market risk. The equation below summarizes the
factors and their impacts on the expected return.

i systemic risk premium

i systemic risk
rl

hig ry +  B (nw =")
inflation & waiting average risk premium

The Treasury bill and market portfolio play crucial roles in financial theories. As such, they require special
attention. We determined earlier that the riskless asset has a zero beta, and the market’s value is one. We apply
these observations to the CAPM to determine the riskless return on a T-bill and the expected market return below.

ly =r + 0 =r

"uu =F +1(ty 4 -r;) =v

The above results from the CAPM confirm that a Treasury bill’s expected return is the riskless rate, and that of
the market portfolio is the market’s expected return. Though these conclusions may seem trivial, they are not. If the
CAPM had predicted any other outcomes, the model would be flat wrong.

Suppose we use the information from the General Mills and Royal Caribbean example and further assume the
market risk premium is 8.6% annually. If that is the case, we can use the CAPM to predict the assets’ expected
returns. They are below.

r, =3.4% + 0x8.6% =3.4%
=3.4% + 0.23 x 8.6% =5.38%

Tolsu

Ty 4, =3-4% + 18.6% = 12%
Teciys =3-4% + 2.48 x 8.6% = 24.73%

All the assets receive 3.4% for expected inflation and a small real rate because investing foregoes early
consumption for later consumption. Then, we add an asset’s risk premium. Treasury bills are riskless, so there isn’t
one. The market portfolio pays the average annual risk premium of 8.6%, so its expected total return is 12%
annually, consistent with U.S. capital market history. General Mills only has 23% of the market’s systematic risk,
so its beta scales down the average risk premium. The CAPM predicts that the expected annual compensation
General Mills shareholders will receive for bearing the company’s nondiversifiable risk is 198 bps. Because its beta
is between that of a T-bill and the market, so too is its risk premium, which brings us to Royal Caribbean.

Royal Caribbean’s beta is 248% larger than the average beta. Consequently, its risk premium is 2.48 times the
average—a gigantic 2,133 bps. The CAPM translates massive systematic risk into massive average rewards for

17


--- Page 18 ---
RCL’s shareholders who accept it. For individuals who are risk-neutral and focus only on expected returns rather
than volatility, RCL makes one think, “Go big or go home.”

By now, the observant student has noticed that an asset’s expected return is a linear function of its beta. Nicely
done, because it’s true. That’s why the CAPM is also known as the Security Market Line (SML), and the terms
are interchangeable. The riskless rate is the intercept, while the market risk premium is the line’s slope. An asset’s
beta is the independent or choice variable. Investors pick the assets and their betas when they form portfolios. The
CAPM postulates the resulting expected return as the dependent variable. The figure below portrays the SML.

slope = ry, —7

Return

intercept = ry

Beta

Let’s revisit General Mills’ and Royal Caribbean’s earlier mispricing in the context of the Security Market Line.

The graph below plots their out-of-equilibrium expected returns relative to the SML.

25%

20%

GIS

0.5 I 15 2 2.5
Beta

Both assets plot off the Security Market Line, General Mills above and Royal Caribbean below. Given a beta of
0.23, General Mills compensates its owners with an expected return of 13%. The SML says the next best investment
of similar risk pays 5.38% annually. What do you want for the risk, 13% or 5.38%? Thirteen percent, of course.
This is why General is so desirable. Its abnormally low price creates an expected return that’s too large. Traders
move quickly to profit from the anomaly. As they do so, the stock price rises, and General Mills’ expected return
falls. In equilibrium, traders take all the easy money off the table. Correctly priced, General Mills has an expected
return of 5.38%, the same as the next best similar asset on the Security Market Line.

As for Royal Caribbean, according to the SML, it pays its shareholders too little for the systematic risk they bear
because its price is abnormally high. Portfolio managers who hold RCL and short sellers will attempt to profit by
selling the stock for more than it’s worth. The combined selling pressure drives Royal Caribbean’s stock price down

18


--- Page 19 ---
and expected return up. The net selling pressure ends when traders become indifferent between Royal Caribbean
and the next best security with the same reward-to-risk ratio, a reward of 24.73% to a beta of 2.48.

The last two paragraphs captured the power of the CAPM and the Security Market Line. The model tells an
investor what their opportunity costs are. It tells them how many basis points they forego for the same systematic
risk if they pursue one venture over another. It measures the risk through beta and predicts the reward as the expected
risk premium beyond what an asset pays for expected inflation and waiting. It’s been a long road since Chapter
Three introduced the risk-reward tradeoff that results from risk-averse behavior, but finally, the CAPM tells us how
to quantify risk and understand how many basis points we forego if we pursue a risky venture.

By now, it’s understandable if you’ve lost the forest for the trees, though, to be honest, our meandering through
the trees has been a fruitful journey. Our purpose was to explore risk and its rewards, both theoretically and
empirically, to gain insights that will help us determine the appropriate required return on assets in capital budgeting.
Without a high-quality estimate of the discount rate, we will not achieve reliable assessments of a project’s value-
creating potential for the company’s shareholders. As the saying goes, garbage in, garbage out, is an outcome we
strive to avoid as good fiduciaries.

You can see how the Security Market Line relates to capital budgeting if we reconsider the original disequilibria
involving General Mills’ and Royal Caribbean’s out-of-equilibrium risk premia. Recall that, given its risk, General
Mills’ expected return was too high because its price was too low. Regarding capital budgeting and Chapter Nine,
it’s an investment where you acquire it for less than it is worth. In other words, it’s a positive NPV investment that
will enhance shareholder wealth. In contrast, Royal Caribbean’s expected return is too low because its price is
overvalued. Given its risk, you’d pay more than it is worth and, in so doing, destroy value. It’s a negative NPV
loser. The figure below illustrates the insights.

25%
20% Positive NPV
RCLe
= 150) se Zero NPV
oO
w~ 10%
50 Negative NPV
‘0
0%
" 0.5 I 15 2 2.5
Beta

Projects that land above the SML are share-enhancing winners because the firm can acquire them for less than
the present value of their expected future inflows. Projects below the SML are more expensive than the expected
value they will create, and a manager acting in the owners’ best interests will avoid them. Projects on the Security
Market Line neither create nor destroy value. As stated elsewhere, the owner does not hire the manager to not create
value, so a value-maximizing manager avoids spending scarce CapEx on projects that fall on the SML. As a
corollary, since the projects on the Security Market Line are zero net present value endeavors, the SML provides
the project’s internal rate of return. In other words, the Capital Asset Pricing Model provides the economy’s set of
internal rates of return for all correctly priced projects. Worthy of a Nobel Prize, no doubt.

19


