--- Page 1 ---
Stock Valuation

WHEN THE STOCK MARKET CLOSED on May 26, 2020, the common stock of Charles Schwab
was going for $34.48 per share. On that same day, stock in iconic candy maker Tootsie Roll closed at $34.44, while
stock in rideshare company Uber closed at $34.56. Because the stock prices of these three companies were so

similar, you might expect that they would be offering similar dividends to their stockholders, but you would be
wrong. In fact, Charles Schwab’s annual dividend was $.72 per share, Tootsie Roll’s was $.35 per share, and Uber
was paying no dividend at all!

As we will see in this chapter, the dividend currently being paid is an important determinant of stock prices.
However, it is obvious from looking at Uber that dividends are not the end of the story. This chapter explores divi-
dends, stock values, and the connection between the two.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

LO1 Explain how stock prices depend on LO3 Lay out the different ways corporate
future dividends and dividend growth. directors are elected to office.

LO2 Show how to value stocks using multiples. LO4 Define how the stock markets work.

For updates on the latest happenings in finance, visit fundamentalsofcorporatefinance.blogspot.com. |

In our previous chapter, we introduced you to bonds and bond valuation. In this chapter, we
turn to the other major source of financing for corporations: common and preferred stock.
We first describe the cash flows associated with a share of stock and then go on to develop
a famous result, the dividend growth model. From there, we move on to examine various
important features of common and preferred stock, focusing on shareholder rights. We
close the chapter with a discussion of how shares of stock are traded and how stock prices
and other important information are reported in the financial press.


--- Page 2 ---
246

8.1

Excel Master

Pipe ay Excel Master
4m coverage online
=

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

Common Stock Valuation

A share of common stock is more difficult to value in practice than a bond for at least
three reasons. First, with common stock, not even the promised cash flows are known
in advance. Second, the life of the investment is essentially forever because common
stock has no maturity. Third, there is no way to easily observe the rate of return that the
market requires. Nonetheless, as we will see, there are cases in which we can come up
with the present value of the future cash flows for a share of stock and thus determine
its value.

CASH FLOWS

Imagine that you are considering buying a share of stock today. You plan to sell the stock
in one year. You somehow know that the stock will be worth $70 at that time. You predict
that the stock will also pay a $10 per share dividend at the end of the year. If you require
a 25 percent return on your investment, what is the most you would pay for the stock? In
other words, what is the present value of the $10 dividend along with the $70 ending value
at 25 percent?

If you buy the stock today and sell it at the end of the year, you will have a total of $80
in cash, At 25 percent:

Present value = ($10 + 70)/1.25 = $64

Therefore, $64 is the value you would assign to the stock today.
More generally, let Pp be the current price of the stock, and assign P, to be the price in
one period. If D, is the cash dividend paid at the end of the period, then:

Po = (D, + P,)/(1 + R)

where R is the required return in the market on this investment.

Notice that we really haven’t said much so far. If we wanted to determine the value of a
share of stock today (Pp), we would first have to come up with the value in one year (P}).
This is even harder to do, so we’ve only made the problem more complicated.

What is the price in one period, P;? We don’t know in general. Instead, suppose we
somehow knew the price in two periods, P,. Given a predicted dividend in two periods, D>,
the stock price in one period would be:

P, =(D, + P,)/(1 + R)

If we were to substitute this expression for P; into our expression for Po, we would have:

Dp +P,
pe Dit _ PIF TER
On T+R OT +R
dD, Dy Po

-G4R') G+R2) G4Re

Now we need to get a price in two periods. We don’t know this either, so we can procras-
tinate again and write:

P, = (D3 + P3)/(1 + R)


--- Page 3 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

If we substitute this back in for P>, we have:

D D P

pie oii ye 2a at 2
Oo U+R) | +R) +R
D3 +P3
D, Dy 1+R

7 + +
(+R)! (+R)? (+R)?
dD, Dz Ds P3

-G+R)!'* +R?’ +R) 4k

You should start to notice that we can push the problem of coming up with the stock
price off into the future forever. Note that no matter what the stock price is, the present
value is essentially zero if we push the sale of the stock far enough away.' What we are
eventually left with is the result that the current price of the stock can be written as the
present value of the dividends beginning in one period and extending out forever:

D, D, D; Ds Ds
+R) +R (+R) +R (+R)

Po

We have illustrated here that the price of the stock today is equal to the present value
of all of the future dividends. How many future dividends are there? In principle, there
can be an infinite number. This means that we still can’t compute a value for the stock
because we would have to forecast an infinite number of dividends and then discount
them all. In the next section, we consider some special cases in which we can get around
this problem.

You might be wondering about shares of stock in companies such as Alphabet that currently
pay no dividends. Small, growing companies frequently plow back everything and pay no
dividends. Are such shares worth nothing? It depends. When we say that the value of the
stock is equal to the present value of the future dividends, we don’t rule out the possibility
that some number of those dividends are zero. They just can’t a// be zero.

Imagine a company that has a provision in its corporate charter that prohibits the paying
of dividends now or ever. The corporation never borrows any money, never pays out any
money to stockholders in any form whatsoever, and never sells any assets. Such a corpora-
tion couldn't really exist because the IRS wouldn't like it, and the stockholders could always
vote to amend the charter if they wanted to. If it did exist, however, what would the stock be
worth?

The stock would be worth absolutely nothing. Such a company would be a financial “black
hole.” Money goes in, but nothing valuable ever comes out. Because nobody would ever get
any return on this investment, the investment would have no value. This example is a little
absurd, but it illustrates that when we speak of companies that don’t pay dividends, what we
really mean is that they are not currently paying dividends.

'The only assumption we make about the stock price is that it is a finite number no matter how far away we push
it. It can be extremely large, just not infinitely so. Because no one has ever observed an infinite stock price, this
assumption is plausible.

247

EXAMPLE 8.1



--- Page 4 ---
248

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

SOME SPECIAL CASES

In a few useful special circumstances, we can come up with a value for the stock. What we
have to do is make some simplifying assumptions about the pattern of future dividends.
The three cases we consider are the following: (1) The dividend has a zero growth rate, (2)
the dividend grows at a constant rate, and (3) the dividend grows at a constant rate after
some length of time. We consider each of these separately.

Zero Growth The case of zero growth is one we’ve already seen. A share of common
stock in a company with a constant dividend is much like a share of preferred stock. From
Chapter 6 (see Example 6.7), we know that the dividend on a share of preferred stock has
zero growth and is constant through time. For a zero-growth share of common stock, this
implies that:

D, = D, = D3 = D = Constant
So, the value of the stock is:

Bye ee Oe ee a Oe os
OU +R) +R? 1+R2 (+R) FR)

Because the dividend is always the same, the stock can be viewed as an ordinary perpetuity
with a cash flow equal to D every period. The per-share value is given by:

Py =DIR

where R is the required return.

Suppose the Paradise Prototyping Company has a policy of paying a $10 per share div-
idend every year. If this policy is to be continued indefinitely, what is the value of a share
of stock if the required return is 20 percent? The stock in this case amounts to an ordinary
perpetuity, so the stock is worth $10/.20 = $50 per share.

Constant Growth Suppose we know that the dividend for some company always
grows at a steady rate. Call this growth rate g. If we let Do be the dividend just paid, then
the next dividend, Dy, is:

D,=Dox(1+a)
The dividend in two periods is:
D,=D,x(1+8)
= [Dox (1+ 8)] x (1 +8)
= D)x (1+)
We could repeat this process to come up with the dividend at any point in the future. In
general, from our discussion of compound growth in Chapter 6, we know that the dividend
t periods into the future, D,, is given by:
D, = Dy x (1 + 8)

As we have previously seen, an asset with cash flows that grow at a constant rate forever is
called a growing perpetuity.

The assumption of steady dividend growth might strike you as peculiar. Why would the |
dividend grow at a constant rate? The reason is that, for many companies, steady growth in
dividends is an explicit goal. For example, in April 2020, Procter & Gamble, the Cincinnati-
based maker of personal care and household products, increased its dividend by 6 percent
to $3.16 per share; this was notable because it was the 64th increase in a row. The subject of


--- Page 5 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

dividend growth falls under the general heading of dividend policy, so we will defer further
discussion of it to a later chapter.

The Hedless Corporation has just paid a dividend of $3 per share. The dividend of this com-
pany grows at a steady rate of 8 percent per year. Based on this information, what will the
dividend be in five years?

Here we have a $3 current amount that grows at 8 percent per year for five years. The
future amount is thus:

$3 x 1.085 = $3 x 1.4693 = $4.41

The dividend will increase by $1.41 over the coming five years.

If the dividend grows at a steady rate, then we have replaced the problem of forecasting
an infinite number of future dividends with the problem of coming up with a single growth
rate, a considerable simplification. In this case, if we take Do to be the dividend just paid
and g to be the constant growth rate, the value of a share of stock can be written as:

dD, Dy D3 .
Po- Gap *a+R +R
_ Do(1 +g)! , Do(1 +g)? , Doll +s)?
~ (1+R)i ~ (1+R)? © (1+)?

As long as the growth rate, g, is less than the discount rate, r, the present value of this series
of cash flows can be written as:

—Dox(1+g9)__Dy

a R-g R-g

This elegant result goes by a lot of different names. We will call it the dividend growth
model. By any name, it is easy to use. To illustrate, suppose Dp is $2.30, R is 13 percent,
and g is 5 percent. The price per share in this case is:

Py = Dox (1 + g)/(R - 8)
= $2.30 x 1.05/(.13 — .05)
= $2.415/.08
= $30.19

We can actually use the dividend growth model to get the stock price at any point in
time, not just today. In general, the price of the stock as of Time f is:

P —Orx(1+9) _ Diss
4 R-g R-g

In our example, suppose we are interested in the price of the stock in five years, P;. We first
need the dividend at Time 5, Ds. Because the dividend just paid is $2.30 and the growth
rate is 5 percent per year, Ds is:

Ds = $2.30 x 1.05° = $2.30 x 1.2763 = $2.935
From the dividend growth model, we get the price of the stock in five years:

Ds; x (1+) _ $2.935 x 1.05 _ $3.0822
R-g 13-05. 08

Ps= = $38.53

249

dividend growth
model

A model that determines the
current price of a stock as its
dividend next period divided
by the discount rate less the
dividend growth rate.


--- Page 6 ---
250

EXAMPLE 8.3

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

The next dividend for the Gordon Growth Company will be $4 per share. Investors require a
16 percent return on companies such as Gordon. Gordon’s dividend increases by 6 percent
every year. Based on the dividend growth model, what is the value of Gordon’s stock today?
What is the value in four years?

The only tricky thing here is that the next dividend, Dy, is given as $4, so we won't multiply
this by (1 + g). With this in mind, the price per share is given by:

Po = Dy KR - g)
= $4/(.16 — .06)
= $4/.10
= $40
Because we already have the dividend in one year, we know that the dividend in four
years is equal to D, x (1 + g)? = $4 x 1.06° = $4.764. So, the price in four years is:
P,=D4x(1+Q9)/(R-Q)
= $4.764 x 1.06/(.16 — .06)
= $5.05/.10
= $50.50
Notice in this example that P, is equal to Po x (1 + g)*.
P4 = $50.50 = $40 x 1.064 = Po x (1 + g)*
To see why this is so, notice first that:
Pg = Ds/(R - 9)
However, Ds is just equal to D, x (1 +. g)*, so we can write P, as:

Py =D,x(1+g)4/(R-g)
= [D1/(R - g)]x (1+9)*
=Pyx(1+g)*
This last example illustrates that the dividend growth model makes the implicit assump-
tion that the stock price will grow at the same constant rate as the dividend. This really isn’t

too surprising. What it tells us is that if the cash flows on an investment grow at a constant
rate through time, so does the value of that investment.

You might wonder what would happen with the dividend growth model if the growth
rate, g, were greater than the discount rate, R. It looks like we would get a negative stock
price because R — g would be less than zero. This is not what would happen.

Instead, if the constant growth rate exceeds the discount rate, then the stock price is
infinitely large. Why? If the growth rate is bigger than the discount rate, the present value
of the dividends keeps getting bigger. Essentially the same is true if the growth rate and
the discount rate are equal. In both cases, the simplification that allows us to replace the
infinite stream of dividends with the dividend growth model is “illegal,” so the answers we
get from the dividend growth model are nonsense unless the growth rate is less than the
discount rate.

Finally, the expression we came up with for the constant growth case will work for any
growing perpetuity, not just dividends on common stock. As we saw in Chapter 6, if C is the
next cash flow on a growing perpetuity, then the present value of the cash flows is given by:

Present value = C\/(R — g) = Co(1 + g)\/(R - g)


--- Page 7 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

Notice that this expression looks like the result for an ordinary perpetuity except that we
have R — g on the bottom instead of just R.

Nonconstant Growth The next case we consider is nonconstant growth. The main
reason to consider this case is to allow for “supernormal” growth rates over some finite
length of time. As we discussed earlier, the growth rate cannot exceed the required return
indefinitely, but it certainly could do so for some number of years. To avoid the problem
of having to forecast and discount an infinite number of dividends, we will require that the
dividends start growing at a constant rate sometime in the future.

For a simple example of nonconstant growth, consider the case of a company that is
currently not paying dividends. You predict that, in five years, the company will pay a div-
idend for the first time. The dividend will be $.50 per share. You expect that this dividend
will then grow at a rate of 10 percent per year indefinitely. The required return on compa-
nies such as this one is 20 percent. What is the price of the stock today?

To see what the stock is worth today, we first find out what it will be worth once divi-
dends are paid. We can then calculate the present value of that future price to get today’s
price. The first dividend will be paid in five years, and the dividend will grow steadily from
then on. Using the dividend growth model, we can say that the price in four years will be:

Py =D4x (1+ g)(R-8)

= Ds/(R- 8)
= $.50/(.20 — .10)
= $5

If the stock will be worth $5 in four years, then we can get the current value by discount-
ing this price back four years at 20 percent:

Po = $5/1.20* = $5/2.0736 = $2.41

The stock is worth $2.41 today.

The problem of nonconstant growth is only slightly more complicated if the dividends
are not zero for the first several years. Suppose you have come up with the following divi-
dend forecasts for the next three years:

Expected Dividend

After the third year, the dividend will grow at a constant rate of 5 percent per year. The
required return is 10 percent. What is the value of the stock today?

In dealing with nonconstant growth, a time line can be helpful. Figure 8.1 illustrates a
time line for this problem. The important thing to notice is when constant growth starts. As
we’ve shown, for this problem, constant growth starts at Time 3. This means we can use our
constant growth model to determine the stock price at Time 3, P3. By far the most common
mistake in this situation is to incorrectly identify the start of the constant growth phase and,
as a result, calculate the future stock price at the wrong time.

As always, the value of the stock is the present value of all the future dividends. To
calculate this present value, we first have to compute the present value of the stock price
three years down the road, just as we did before. We then have to add in the present

251


--- Page 8 ---
252

Crise 8.1

Nonconstant Growth

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

Nonconstant growth Constant growth @ 5%
|~—-— >|+ >
Time fo) a 2 3 4 5
k aS t So
Dividends $1 $2 $2.50 $2.50 $2.50

x 1.05 x 1,052

value of the dividends that will be paid between now and then. So, the price in three
years is:

P3 = D3X (1+ g)/(R-g)
= $2.50 x 1.05/(.10 — .05)
= $52.50

We can now calculate the total value of the stock as the present value of the first three div-
idends plus the present value of the price at Time 3, P3:

D, Dy D3 Ps
Po= + +
°-G4R * G+R2* U4) U4tR?
_ $l, $2, $2.50 , $52.50
1.10 * 1102 * 110° * 1.108
= $.91 + 1.65 + 1.88 + 39.44
= $43.88

The value of the stock today is thus $43.88.

Chain Reaction, Inc., has been growing at a phenomenal rate of 30 percent per year because
of its rapid expansion and explosive sales. You believe this growth rate will last for three more
years and will then drop to 10 percent per year. If the growth rate then remains at 10 percent
indefinitely, what is the total value of the stock? Total dividends just paid were $5 million, and
the required return is 20 percent.

Chain Reaction’s situation is an example of supernormal growth. It is unlikely that a 30 percent
growth rate can be sustained for any extended time. To value the equity in this company, we first
need to calculate the total dividends over the supernormal growth period:

Total Dividends (in millions)

$5.00 x 1.3=$ 6.500

6.50x1.3= 8.450
8.45x1.3= 10.985

The price at Time 3 can be calculated as:
Ps = D3 x (1 +g)/(R - 9)
where g is the long-run growth rate. So, we have:

P3 = $10.985 x 1.10/(.20 — .10) = $120.835


--- Page 9 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation 253

To determine the value today, we need the present value of this amount plus the present
value of the total dividends:
D, D2 D3 P3
+ + +
(T+ PR) (1 +RP (1 +R) (1 +R)?
_ $6.50 , $8.45 _ $10.985 , $120.835

Po=

="720 * 4.2027 4.202 1.202
= $5.42 + 5.87 + 6.36 + 69.93
= $87.57

The total value of the stock today is thus $87.57 million. If there were, for example,
20 million shares, then the stock would be worth $87.57/20 = $4.38 per share.

Two-Stage Growth The last case we consider is a special case of nonconstant growth:
two-stage growth. Here, the idea is that the dividend will grow at a rate of g, for t years and
then grow at a rate of g, thereafter, forever. In this case, the value of the stock can be written as:

t
D 14+91 P, @
Po =——-_ x |1- (~~ —t,
a) ar? (re *G+R
Notice that the first term in our expression is the present value of a growing annuity, which
we discussed in Chapter 6. In this first stage, g, can be greater than R. The second part is

the present value of the stock price once the second stage begins at Time t.
We can calculate P, as follows:

P.= Diss _ Do X (14+ 91)' x (1+ 92) @
R-g2 R-ga2

In this calculation, we need the dividend at Time f + 1, D,,,;, to get the stock price at Time 1, P,.
Notice that to get the dividend at Time t + 1, we grew the current dividend, Do, at rate g; for t
periods and then grew it one period at rate g>. Also, in this second stage, g> must be less than R.

EXAMPLE 8.5

The Highfield Company’s dividend is expected to grow at 20 percent for the next five years.
After that, the growth is expected to be 4 percent forever. If the required return is 10 percent,
what's the value of the stock? The dividend just paid was $2.

There is a fair amount of computation here, but it is mostly just “plug and chug” with a
calculator. We can start by calculating the stock price five years from now, Ps:

De __ Dox (1 +91) x (1 + 2)

Ps

“R=92 R=gp

_ $2x(1+.20)5 x (1 +.04) _ $5.18
_ 10 = .04 ~ 06
= $86.26

We then plug this result into our two-stage growth formula to get the price today:
D 14+9 P,
Po =p |1- - uy
o= Rog, | (2%) ] + aoe

_$2x(1+.20),[,_ (1+.20)°
*"~10 —.20 1+.10

= $66.64

$86.26
(1 +.10)°

+



--- Page 10 ---
254

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

Notice that we were given Dy = $2 here, so we had to grow it by 20 percent for one
period to get D,. Notice also that g, is bigger than R in this problem, but that fact does not
cause an issue.

dividend yield
Astock’s expected cash
dividend divided by its current
price.

capital gains yield
The dividend growth rate, or
the rate at which the value of an
investment grows.

COMPONENTS OF THE REQUIRED RETURN

Thus far, we have taken the required return, or discount rate, R, as given. We will have quite
a bit to say about this subject in Chapters 12 and 13. For now, we want to examine the impli-
cations of the dividend growth model for this required return. Earlier, we calculated Pp as:

Po = DR - 8)
If we rearrange this to solve for R, we get:

R-g=D,/P,
R=D,/P) +g

This tells us that the total return, R, has two components. The first of these, D,/Po, is called
the dividend yield. Because this is calculated as the expected cash dividend divided by the
current price, it is conceptually similar to the current yield on a bond.

The second part of the total return is the growth rate, g. We know that the dividend
growth rate is also the rate at which the stock price grows (see Example 8.3). This growth
rate can be interpreted as the capital gains yield—that is, the rate at which the value of
the investment grows.”

To illustrate the components of the required return, suppose we observe a stock selling for
$20 per share. The next dividend will be $1 per share. You think that the dividend will grow by
10 percent per year more or less indefinitely. What return does this stock offer if this is correct?

The dividend growth model calculates total return as:

R = Dividend yield + Capital gains yield

R= D,/Po + g
In this case, total return works out to be:
R = $1/$20 + .10

= 05+ .10

= .15, or 15%

This stock has an expected return of 15 percent.
We can verify this answer by calculating the price in one year, P;, using 15 percent as
the required return. Based on the dividend growth model, this price is:

P, =D, x (1+ g)(R- g)
= $1 x 1.10/(.15 — .10)
= $1.10/.05
= $22
Notice that this $22 is $20 x 1.1, so the stock price has grown by 10 percent, as it should.
If you pay $20 for the stock today, you will get a $1 dividend at the end of the year, and you
will have a $22 — 20 = $2 gain. Your dividend yield is thus $1/20 = .05, or 5%. Your capital
gains yield is $2/$20 = .10, or 10%, so your total return is 5% + 10% = 15%.

?Here and elsewhere, we use the term capital gains a little loosely. For the record, a capital gain (or loss) is,
strictly speaking, something defined by the IRS. For our purposes, it would be more accurate (but less common)
to use the term price appreciation instead of capital gain.


--- Page 11 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

To get a feel for actual numbers in this context, consider that, according to the March
2020 Value Line Investment Survey, Procter & Gamble’s dividends were expected to grow by
4 percent over the next 5 or so years, compared to a historical growth rate of 4 percent over the
preceding 5 years and 6.5 percent over the preceding 10 years. In 2020, the projected dividend
for the coming year was given as $3.00. The stock price at that time was about $120 per share.
What is the return investors require on P&G? Here, the dividend yield is 2.5 percent and the
capital gains yield is 4 percent, giving a total required return of 6.5 percent on P&G stock.

STOCK VALUATION USING MULTIPLES

An obvious problem with our dividend-based approach to stock valuation is that many com-
panies don’t pay dividends. What do we do in such cases? A common approach is to make use
of the PE ratio, which we defined in Chapter 3 as the ratio of a stock’s price per share to its
earnings per share (EPS) over the previous year. The idea here is to have some sort of bench-
mark or reference PE ratio, which we then multiply by earnings to come up with a price:

Price at Time t = P, = Benchmark PE ratio x EPS,

The benchmark PE ratio could come from one of several possible sources. It could be
based on similar companies (perhaps an industry average or median), or it could be based on
acompany’s own historical values. Suppose we are trying to value Inactivision, Inc., a video
game developer known for its hit Slack Ops series. Inactivision does not pay dividends, but
after studying the industry, you feel that a PE ratio of 20 is appropriate for a company like
this one. Total earnings over the four most recent quarters combined are $2 per share, so
you think the stock should sell for 20 x $2 = $40. You might view this stock as an attractive
purchase if it is going for less than $40, but not attractive if it sells for more than $40.

Security analysts spend a lot of time forecasting future earnings, particularly for the
coming year. A PE ratio that is based on estimated future earnings is called a forward PE
ratio. Suppose you felt that Inactivision’s earnings for the coming year were going to be
$2.50, reflecting the growing popularity of the company’s World of Slackcraft massively
multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG). In this case, if the current stock price is
$40, the forward PE ratio is $40/$2.50 = 16.

Finally, notice that your benchmark PE of 20 applies to earnings over the previous year. If
earnings over the coming year turn out to be $2.50, then the stock price one year from today
should be 20 x $2.50 = $50. Forecast prices such as this one are often called target prices.

Often we will be interested in valuing newer companies that both don’t pay dividends and
are not yet profitable, meaning that earnings are negative. What do we do then? One answer
is to use the price-sales ratio, which we also introduced in Chapter 3. As the name suggests,
this ratio is the price per share on the stock divided by sales per share. You use this ratio just
like you use the PE ratio, except you use sales per share instead of earnings per share. As with
PE ratios, price-sales ratios vary depending on company age and industry. Typical values
are in the .8-2.0 range, but they can be much higher for younger, faster-growing companies.

A third ratio often used to value companies is the EV/EBITDA ratio, which we intro-
duced in Chapter 3. The EV/EBITDA measures a company’s enterprise value in relation to
a measure of its cash created.

As with any ratio, all three valuation ratios vary based on company age and industry.
Table 8.1 shows the average ratios in different industries. As you can see, significant variation
exists between industries, but the difference is not always consistent For example, the PE ratio
for the soft drink and cable TV industries are similar, but the price-sales and EV/EBITDA
ratios for the soft drink industry are about twice what we see in the cable TV industry.

For future reference, our discussion of stock valuation techniques is summarized in
Table 8.2.

255


--- Page 12 ---
P PS EV/EBITDA

Aerospace/Defense 21.31 1.54 10.78
Beverage (Soft) 24.71 3.84 18.48
Cable TV 23.55 1.79 hi?)
Drugs (Biotechnology) 43.88 5.87 10.00
Entertainment 87.08 3.02 14.23
Farming/Agriculture 15.88 0.58 11.03
Food wholesalers 16.73 0.37 ea ek)
Furniture/Home furnishings 13.89 0.68 7.18
Green & renewable energy 28.64 ays 18.64
Power 18.21 1.99 10.93
Restaurant/Dining 24.88 2.66 16:97;

ource: Aswath Damodaran, http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/“adamodar/, retrieved November 11, 2019.

|. The General Case

In general, the price today of a share of stock, Po, is the present value of all of its future
dividends, D,, D2, D3,...:
D D D
Po=—— + 4 + te
ONT +R) (T+R (1 +R)

where R is the required return.

ll. Constant Growth Case

If the dividend grows at a steady rate, g, then the price can be written as:
eel)

ape

This result is called the dividend growth model.

lll. Nonconstant Growth

If the dividend grows steadily after t periods, then the price can be written as:

Po

D D D P.
pees 4 ri aie t t
OG eR asRe tT aeRO SR
where:

D,x(1+49)

Piste eS)
be R=")

IV. Two-Stage Growth

If the dividend grows at rate g, for t periods and then grows at rate g> thereafter, then the price
can be written as:

mes _ {itm P,
Pom gen [1 (38) | + abe

where:
Pee Disa _ Do X (1 +91) (1 +92)
R-g2 R-g2

V. Valuation Using Multiples

For stocks that don’t pay dividends (or have erratic dividend growth rates), we can value them
using the PE ratio and/or the price-sales ratio:

P, = Benchmark PE ratio x EPS;

P, = Benchmark price-sales ratio x Sales per share;

VI. The Required Return

The required return, R, can be written as the sum of two things:

R=D,/Po+g

where D,/Pp is the dividend yield and g is the capital gains yield (which is the same thing as
the growth rate in dividends for the steady growth case).


--- Page 13 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

Concept Questions

8.1a | Whatare the relevant cash flows for valuing a share of common stock?
8.1b Does the value of a share of stock depend on how long you expect to keep it?
8.1¢ | Whatis the value of a share of stock when the dividend grows at a constant rate?

Some Features of Common
and Preferred Stocks

In discussing common stock features, we focus on shareholder rights and dividend pay-
ments. For preferred stock, we explain what preferred means, and we also debate whether
preferred stock is really debt or equity.

COMMON STOCK FEATURES

The term common stock means different things to different people, but it is usually applied
to stock that has no special preference either in receiving dividends or in bankruptcy.

Shareholder Rights The conceptual structure of the corporation assumes that
shareholders elect directors who, in turn, hire managers to carry out their directives. Share-
holders, therefore, control the corporation through the right to elect the directors. Generally,
only shareholders have this right.

Directors are elected each year at an annual meeting. Although there are exceptions
(discussed next), the general idea is “one share, one vote” (not one shareholder, one vote).
Corporate democracy is thus very different from our political democracy. With corporate
democracy, the “golden rule” prevails absolutely.

Directors are elected at an annual shareholders’ meeting by a vote of the holders of a
majority of shares who are present and entitled to vote. However, the exact mechanism
for electing directors differs across companies. The most important difference is whether
shares must be voted cumulatively or voted straight.

To illustrate the two different voting procedures, imagine that a corporation has two
shareholders: Smith with 20 shares and Jones with 80 shares. Both want to be a director.
Jones does not want Smith to be a director, however. We assume there are a total of four
directors to be elected.

The effect of cumulative voting is to permit minority participation.‘ If cumulative vot-
ing is permitted, the total number of votes that each shareholder may cast is determined
first. This is usually calculated as the number of shares (owned or controlled) multiplied by
the number of directors to be elected.

With cumulative voting, the directors are elected all at once. In our example, this means
that the top four vote getters will be the new directors. A shareholder can distribute votes
however he or she wishes.

Will Smith get a seat on the board? If we ignore the possibility of a five-way tie, then the
answer is yes. Smith will cast 20 x 4 = 80 votes, and Jones will cast 80 x 4 = 320 votes. If
Smith gives all his votes to himself, he is assured of a directorship. The reason is that Jones
can’t divide 320 votes among four candidates in such a way as to give all of them more than
80 votes, so Smith will finish fourth at worst.

>The golden rule: Whosoever has the gold makes the rules.
4By minority participation, we mean participation by shareholders with relatively small amounts of stock.

257

8.2

common stock
Equity without priority for
dividends or in bankruptcy.

cumulative voting

A procedure in which a
shareholder may cast all votes
for one member of the board of
directors.


--- Page 14 ---
258

straight voting

A procedure in which a
shareholder may cast all votes
for each member of the board of
directors.

EXAMPLE 8.6

proxy

Agrant of authority by a
shareholder allowing another
individual to vote his or her
shares.

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

In general, if there are N directors up for election, then 1/(N + 1) percent of the stock plus
one share will guarantee you a seat. In our current example, this is 1/(4 + 1) = .20, or 20%.
So the more seats that are up for election at one time, the easier (and cheaper) it is to win one.

With straight voting, the directors are elected one at a time. Each time, Smith can cast
20 votes and Jones can cast 80. As a consequence, Jones will elect all of the candidates. The
only way to guarantee a seat is to own 50 percent plus one share. This also guarantees that
you will win every seat, so it’s really all or nothing.

Stock in JRJ Corporation sells for $20 per share and features cumulative voting. There are
10,000 shares outstanding. If three directors are up for election, how much does it cost to
ensure yourself a seat on the board?

The question here is how many shares of stock it will take to get a seat. The answer is
2,501, so the cost is 2,501 x $20 = $50,020. Why 2,501? Because there is no way the
remaining 7,499 votes can be divided among three people to give all of them more than
2,501 votes. Suppose two people receive 2,502 votes and the first two seats. A third person
can receive at most 10,000 — 2,502 — 2,502 — 2,501 = 2,495, so the third seat is yours.

Many companies have staggered elections for directors. With staggered elections, only a
fraction of the directorships (often one-third) are up for election at a particular time. If only
two directors are up for election at any one time, it will take 1/(2 + 1) = .3333, or 33.33%
of the stock plus one share to guarantee a seat. Staggered boards are often called classified
boards because directors are placed into different classes with terms that expire at different
times. In recent years, corporations have come under pressure to declassify their boards,
meaning that all directors would stand for election every year, and many have done so.

Overall, staggering has two basic effects:

1. Staggering makes it more difficult for a minority to elect a director because there are
fewer directors to be elected at one time.

2. Staggering makes takeover attempts less likely to be successful because it makes it
more difficult to vote in a majority of new directors.

We should note that staggering may serve a beneficial purpose. It provides “institutional
memory”—that is, continuity on the board of directors. This may be important for corpora-
tions with significant long-range plans and projects.

Proxy Voting A proxy is the grant of authority by a shareholder to someone else to
vote his or her shares. For convenience, much of the voting in large public corporations is
actually done by proxy.

As we have seen, with straight voting, each share of stock has one vote. The owner of
10,000 shares has 10,000 votes. Large companies have hundreds of thousands or even mil-
lions of shareholders. Shareholders can come to the annual meeting and vote in person, or
they can transfer their right to vote to another party.

Obviously, management always tries to get as many proxies as possible transferred to it.
If shareholders are not satisfied with management, an “outside” group of shareholders can
try to obtain votes via proxy. They can vote by proxy in an attempt to replace management
by electing enough directors. The resulting battle is called a proxy fight.

Classes of Stock Some firms have more than one class of common stock. Often the
classes are created with unequal voting rights. The Ford Motor Company, for example, has


--- Page 15 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

Class B common stock, which is not publicly traded (it is held by Ford family interests and
trusts). This class has 40 percent of the voting power, even though it represents less than
10 percent of the total number of shares outstanding.

There are many other cases of corporations with different classes of stock. At one time,
General Motors had its “GM Classic” shares (the original) and two additional classes,
Class E (“GME”) and Class H (‘““GMH”). These classes were created to help pay for two
large acquisitions, Electronic Data Systems and Hughes Aircraft. Another good example
is Alphabet, the web search company, which became publicly owned in 2004. Alphabet
originally had two classes of common stock, A and B. The Class A shares are held by the
public, and each share has one vote. The Class B shares are held by company insiders, and
each Class B share has 10 votes. Then, in 2014, the company had a stock split of its Class B
shares, creating Class C shares, which have no vote at all. As a result, Alphabet’s founders
and managers control the company.

Historically, the New York Stock Exchange did not allow companies to create classes of
publicly traded common stock with unequal voting rights. Exceptions (like Ford) appear to
have been made. In addition, many non-NYSE companies have dual classes of common stock.

A primary reason for creating dual or multiple classes of stock has to do with control
of the firm. If such stock exists, management of a firm can raise equity capital by issuing
nonvoting or limited-voting stock while maintaining control.

The subject of unequal voting rights is controversial in the United States, and the idea of
one share, one vote has a strong following and a long history. Interestingly, shares with unequal
voting rights are quite common in the United Kingdom and elsewhere around the world.

Other Rights The value of a share of common stock in a corporation is directly related
to the general rights of shareholders. In addition to the right to vote for directors, sharehold-
ers usually have the following rights:

1. The right to share proportionally in dividends paid.

2. The right to share proportionally in assets remaining after liabilities have been paid in
a liquidation.

3. The right to vote on stockholder matters of great importance, such as a merger. Voting
is usually done at the annual meeting or a special meeting.

In addition, stockholders sometimes have the right to share proportionally in any new stock
sold. This is called the preemptive right.

Essentially, a preemptive right means that a company that wishes to sell stock must
first offer it to the existing stockholders before offering it to the general public. The pur-
pose is to give stockholders the opportunity to protect their proportionate ownership in the
corporation.

Dividends A distinctive feature of corporations is that they have shares of stock on
which they are authorized by law to pay dividends to their shareholders. Dividends paid
to shareholders represent a return on the capital directly or indirectly contributed to the
corporation by the shareholders. The payment of dividends is at the discretion of the board
of directors.

Some important characteristics of dividends include the following:

1. Unless a dividend is declared by the board of directors of a corporation, it is not a lia-
bility of the corporation. A corporation cannot default on an undeclared dividend. As
a consequence, corporations cannot become bankrupt because of nonpayment of divi-
dends. The amount of the dividend and even whether it is paid are decisions based on
the business judgment of the board of directors.

259

dividends
Payments by a corporation to
shareholders, made in either
cash or stock.


--- Page 16 ---
260

preferred stock

Stock with dividend priority over
common stock, normally with a
fixed dividend rate, sometimes
without voting rights.

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

2. The payment of dividends by the corporation is not a business expense. Dividends are
not deductible for corporate tax purposes. In short, dividends are paid out of the cor-
poration’s aftertax profits.

3. Dividends received by individual shareholders are taxable. In 2020, the tax rate was 15
to 20 percent. However, corporations that own stock in other corporations are permit-
ted to exclude 50 percent of the dividend amounts they receive and are taxed on only
the remaining 50 percent (the 50 percent exclusion was reduced from 70 percent by the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017).

PREFERRED STOCK FEATURES

Preferred stock differs from common stock because it has preference over common stock in
the payment of dividends and in the distribution of corporation assets in the event of liquida-
tion. Preference means only that the holders of the preferred shares must receive a dividend
(in the case of an ongoing firm) before holders of common shares are entitled to anything.

Preferred stock is a form of equity from a legal and tax standpoint. It is important to note
that holders of preferred stock sometimes have no voting privileges.

Stated Value Preferred shares have a stated liquidating value, usually $100 per share.
The cash dividend is described in terms of dollars per share. For example, General Motors
“$5 preferred” easily translates into a dividend yield of 5 percent of stated value.

Cumulative and Noncumulative Dividends A preferred dividend is not like
interest on a bond. The board of directors may decide not to pay the dividends on preferred
shares, and their decision may have nothing to do with the current net income of the corporation.

Dividends payable on preferred stock are either cumulative or noncumulative; most are
cumulative. If preferred dividends are cumulative and are not paid in a particular year, they
will be carried forward as an arrearage. Usually, both the accumulated (past) preferred div-
idends and the current preferred dividends must be paid before the common shareholders
can receive anything.

Unpaid preferred dividends are not debts of the firm. Directors elected by the common
shareholders can defer preferred dividends indefinitely. In such cases, common sharehold-
ers must also forgo dividends. In addition, holders of preferred shares are often granted
voting and other rights if preferred dividends have not been paid for some time. For exam-
ple, at one point, USAir (now part of American Airlines) had failed to pay dividends on one
of its preferred stock issues for six quarters. As a consequence, the holders of the shares
were allowed to nominate two people to represent their interests on the airline’s board.
Because preferred stockholders receive no interest on the accumulated dividends, some
have argued that firms have an incentive to delay paying preferred dividends; but, as we
have seen, this may mean sharing control with preferred stockholders.

Is Preferred Stock Really Debt? A good case can be made that preferred stock
is really debt in disguise, a kind of equity bond. Preferred shareholders receive a stated
dividend only; and if the corporation is liquidated, preferred shareholders get a stated value.
Often, preferred stocks carry credit ratings much like those of bonds. Furthermore, preferred
stock is sometimes convertible into common stock, and preferred stocks are often callable.

5For the record, the 50 percent exclusion applies when the recipient owns less than 20 percent of the outstanding
stock in a corporation. If a corporation owns more than 20 percent but less than 65 percent, the exclusion is

80 percent. If more than 65 percent is owned, the corporation can file a single “consolidated” return and the
exclusion is effectively 100 percent.


--- Page 17 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

In addition, many issues of preferred stock have obligatory sinking funds. The existence
of such a sinking fund effectively creates a final maturity because it means that the entire
issue will ultimately be retired. For these reasons, preferred stock seems to be a lot like
debt. For tax purposes, preferred dividends are treated like common stock dividends.

In the 1990s, firms began to sell securities that looked a lot like preferred stocks but
were treated as debt for tax purposes. The new securities were given interesting acronyms
like TOPrS (trust-originated preferred securities, or toppers), MIPS (monthly income
preferred securities), and QUIPS (quarterly income preferred securities), among others.
Because of various specific features, these instruments can be counted as debt for tax pur-
poses, making the interest payments tax deductible (up to certain limits). Payments made
to investors in these instruments are treated as interest for personal income taxes. Until
2003, interest payments and dividends were taxed at the same marginal tax rate. When
the tax rate on dividend payments was reduced, these instruments were not included, so
individuals must still pay their higher income tax rate on dividend payments received from
these instruments.

Concept Questions

8.2a What is a proxy?
8.2b What rights do stockholders have?
8.2c Why is preferred stock called preferred?

The Stock Markets

Back in Chapter 1, we briefly mentioned that shares of stock are bought and sold on vari-
ous stock exchanges, the two most important of which are the New York Stock Exchange
and Nasdaq. From our earlier discussion, recall that the stock market consists of a primary
market and a secondary market. In the primary, or new issue, market, shares of stock are
first brought to the market and sold to investors. In the secondary market, existing shares
are traded among investors.

In the primary market, companies sell securities to raise money. We will discuss this
process in detail in a later chapter. We focus mainly on secondary market activity in this
section. We conclude with a discussion of how stock prices are quoted in the financial press.

DEALERS AND BROKERS

Because most securities transactions involve dealers and brokers, it is important to under-
stand exactly what is meant by the terms dealer and broker. A dealer maintains an inventory
and stands ready to buy and sell at any time. In contrast, a broker brings buyers and sellers
together but does not maintain an inventory. When we speak of used car dealers and real
estate brokers, we recognize that the used car dealer maintains an inventory, whereas the
real estate broker does not.

In the securities markets, a dealer stands ready to buy securities from investors wishing
to sell them and sell securities to investors wishing to buy them. Recall from our previous
chapter that the price the dealer is willing to pay is called the bid price. The price at which
the dealer will sell is called the ask price (sometimes called the asked, offered, or offering
price). The difference between the bid and ask prices is called the spread, and it is the basic
source of dealer profits.

261

8.3

Excel Master
Excel Master
coverage online

primary market

The market in which new
securities are originally sold to
investors.

secondary market
The market in which previously
issued securities are traded
among investors.

dealer
An agent who buys and sells
securities from inventory.

broker
An agent who arranges security
transactions among investors.


--- Page 18 ---
262

How big is the bid-ask spread
on your favorite stock? Check
out the latest quotes at
www.bloomberg.com.

members

As of 2006, a member is the
owner of a trading license on
the NYSE.

designated market
makers (DMMs)

NYSE members who act as
dealers in particular stocks,
Formerly known as “specialists.”

floor brokers
NYSE members who execute
customer buy and sell orders.

supplemental
liquidity providers
(SLPs)

Investment firms that are active
participants in stocks assigned
to them. Their job is to make a
one-sided market (i.¢., offering
to either buy or sell). They trade
purely for their own accounts.

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

Dealers exist in all areas of the economy, not just the stock markets. For example, your
local college bookstore is probably both a primary and a secondary market textbook dealer.
If you buy a new book, this is a primary market transaction. If you buy a used book, this is
a secondary market transaction, and you pay the store’s ask price. If you sell the book back,
you receive the store’s bid price (often half of the ask price). The bookstore’s spread is the
difference between the two prices.

In contrast, a securities broker arranges transactions between investors, matching inves-
tors wishing to buy securities with investors wishing to sell securities. The distinctive
characteristic of security brokers is that they do not buy or sell securities for their own
accounts. Facilitating trades by others is their business.

ORGANIZATION OF THE NYSE

The New York Stock Exchange, or NYSE, popularly known as the Big Board, celebrated
its bicentennial a few years ago. It has occupied its current location on Wall Street since the
turn of the twentieth century. Measured in terms of the total value of shares listed, it is the
largest stock market in the world.

Members The NYSE has 1,366 exchange members. Prior to 2006, the exchange
members were said to own “seats” on the exchange, and collectively the members of the
exchange were also the owners. For this and other reasons, seats were valuable and were
bought and sold fairly regularly. Seat prices reached a record $4 million in 2005.

In 2006, all of this changed when the NYSE became a publicly owned corporation. Natu-
rally, its stock was listed on the NYSE. Now, instead of purchasing seats, exchange members
must purchase trading licenses, the number of which is still limited to 1,366. In 2020, a license
would set you back a cool $50,000—per year. Having a license entitles you to buy and sell
securities on the floor of the exchange. Different members play different roles in this regard.

On April 4, 2007, the NYSE grew even larger when it merged with Euronext to form
NYSE Euronext. Euronext was a stock exchange in Amsterdam, with subsidiaries in
Belgium, France, Portugal, and the United Kingdom. With the merger, NYSE Euronext
became the world’s “first global exchange.” Further expansion occurred in 2008 when
NYSE Euronext merged with the American Stock Exchange. Then, in November 2013,
the acquisition of the NYSE by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) was completed. ICE,
which was founded in May 2000, was originally a commodities exchange, but its rapid
growth gave it the necessary $8.2 billion for the acquisition of the NYSE.

As we briefly describe how the NYSE operates, keep in mind that other markets owned
by NYSE Euronext and ICE may function differently. What makes the NYSE somewhat
unique is that it is a hybrid market. In a hybrid market, trading takes place both electroni-
cally and face-to-face.

With electronic trading, orders to buy and orders to sell are submitted to the exchange.
Orders are compared by a computer and whenever there is a match, the orders are executed
with no human intervention. Most trades on the NYSE occur this way. For orders that are
not handled electronically, the NYSE relies on its license holders. There are three differ-
ent types of license holders, designated market makers (DMMs), floor brokers, and
supplemental liquidity providers (SLPs), and we now discuss the role played by each.

The DMMs, formerly known as “specialists,” act as dealers in particular stocks. Typi-
cally, each stock on the NYSE is assigned to a single DMM. As a dealer, a DMM maintains
a two-sided market, meaning that the DMM continually posts and updates bid and ask
prices. By doing so, the DMM ensures that there is always a buyer or seller available,
thereby promoting market liquidity.

The job of a floor broker is to execute trades for customers, with an emphasis on getting
the best price possible. Floor brokers are generally employees of large brokerage firms such


--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

as Merrill Lynch, the wealth management division of Bank of America. The interaction
between floor brokers and DMMs is the key to nonelectronic trading on the NYSE. We
discuss this interaction in detail in just a moment.

The SLPs are essentially investment firms that agree to be active participants in stocks
assigned to them. Their job is to regularly make a one-sided market (i.e., offering to either
buy or sell). They trade purely for their own accounts (using their own money), so they do not
represent customers. They are given a small rebate on their buys and sells, thereby encourag-
ing them to be more aggressive. The NYSE’s goal is to generate as much liquidity as possible,
which makes it easier for ordinary investors to quickly buy and sell at prevailing prices.
Unlike DMMs and floor brokers, SLPs do not operate on the floor of the stock exchange.

In recent years, floor brokers have become less important on the exchange floor because
of the efficient Pillar system, which allows orders to be transmitted electronically directly to
the DMM. Additionally, the NYSE has an electronic platform called Arca, which accounts
for a substantial percentage of all trading on the NYSE, particularly for smaller orders. The
average time for a trade on the NYSE Arca is less than 1 second.

Finally, a small number of NYSE members are floor traders who independently trade for
their own accounts. Floor traders try to anticipate temporary price fluctuations and profit
from them by buying low and selling high. In recent decades, the number of floor traders
has declined substantially, suggesting that it has become increasingly difficult to profit
from short-term trading on the exchange floor.

Operations Now that we have a basic idea of how the NYSE is organized and who the
major players are, we turn to the question of how trading actually takes place. Fundamen-
tally, the business of the NYSE is to attract and process order flow. The term order flow
refers to the flow of customer orders to buy and sell stocks. The customers of the NYSE
are the millions of individual investors and tens of thousands of institutional investors who
place their orders to buy and sell shares in NYSE-listed companies. The NYSE has been
quite successful in attracting order flow. Currently, it is not unusual for well over a billion
shares to change hands in a single day.

Floor Activity _ It is quite likely that you have seen footage of the NYSE trading floor
on television. If so, you would have seen a big room, about the size of a basketball gym.
This big room is called, technically, “the Big Room.” There are a few other, smaller rooms
that you normally don’t see, one of which is called “the Garage” because that is what it was
before it was taken over for trading.

On the floor of the exchange are a number of stations, each with a roughly figure-eight
shape. These stations have multiple counters with numerous terminal screens above and on
the sides. People operate behind and in front of the counters in relatively stationary positions.

Other people move around on the exchange floor, frequently returning to the many tele-
phones positioned along the exchange walls. In all, you may be reminded of worker ants
moving around an ant colony. It is natural to wonder, “What are all those people doing
down there (and why are so many wearing funny-looking coats)?”

As an overview of exchange floor activity, here is a quick look at what goes on. Each of
the counters is a DMM’s post. DMMs normally operate in front of their posts to monitor
and manage trading in the stocks assigned to them. Clerical employees working for the
DMMs operate behind the counter. Moving from the many workstations lining the walls of
the exchange out to the exchange floor and back again are swarms of floor brokers, receiv-
ing customer orders, walking out to DMMs’ posts where the orders can be executed, and
returning to confirm order executions and receive new customer orders.

To better understand activity on the NYSE trading floor, imagine yourself as a floor
broker. Your phone clerk has just handed you an order to sell 20,000 shares of Walmart

263

order flow
The flow of customer orders to
buy and sell securities.

Take a virtual field trip to the
New York Stock Exchange at
www.nyse.com.

DMM's post
A fixed place on the exchange
floor where the DMM operates.


--- Page 20 ---
264

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

for a customer of the brokerage company that employs you. The customer wants to sell the
stock at the best possible price as soon as possible. You immediately walk (running violates
exchange rules) to the DMM’s post where Walmart stock is traded.

As you approach the DMM’s post where Walmart is traded, you check the terminal
screen for information on the current market price. The screen reveals that the last executed
trade was at $110.10 and that the DMM is bidding $110 per share. You could immediately
sell-to the DMM at $110, but that would be too easy.

Instead, as the customer’s representative, you are obligated to get the best possible
price. It is your job to “work” the order, and your job depends on providing satisfac-
tory order execution service. So, you look around for another broker who represents a
customer who wants to buy Walmart stock. Luckily, you quickly find another broker at
the DMM’s post with an order to buy 20,000 shares. Noticing that the DMM is asking
$110.10 per share, you both agree to execute your orders with each other at a price of
$110.05. This price is exactly halfway between the DMM’s bid and ask prices, and it
saves each of your customers $.05 x 20,000 = $1,000 as compared to dealing at the
posted prices.

For a very actively traded stock, there may be many buyers and sellers around the
DMM’s post, and most of the trading will be done directly between brokers. This is called
trading in the “crowd.” In such cases, the DMM’s responsibility is to maintain order and to
make sure that all buyers and sellers receive a fair price. In other words, the DMM essen-
tially functions as a referee.

More often, there will be no crowd at the DMM’s post. Going back to our Walmart
example, suppose you are unable to quickly find another broker with an order to buy 20,000
shares. Because you have an order to sell immediately, you may have no choice but to sell
to the DMM at the bid price of $110. In this case, the need to execute an order quickly
takes priority, and the DMM provides the liquidity necessary to allow immediate order
execution.

Finally, note that colored coats are worn by many of the people on the floor of the
exchange. The color of the coat indicates the person’s job or position. Clerks, runners,
visitors, exchange officials, and so on wear particular colors to identify themselves. Also,
things can get a little hectic on a busy day, with the result that good clothing doesn’t last
long; the cheap coats offer some protection.

NASDAQ OPERATIONS

In terms of total dollar volume of trading, the second largest stock market in the United
States is Nasdaq (say “Naz-dak”). The somewhat odd name originally was an acronym for
the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations system, but Nasdaq
is now a name in its own right.

Introduced in 1971, the Nasdaq market is a computer network of securities dealers and
others that disseminates timely security price quotes to computer screens worldwide. Nas-
daq dealers act as market makers for securities listed on the Nasdaq. As market makers,
Nasdaq dealers post bid and ask prices at which they accept sell and buy orders, respectively.
With each price quote, they also post the number of shares that they obligate themselves to
trade at their quoted prices.

Like NYSE DMMs, Nasdaq market makers trade on an inventory basis—that is, using
their inventory as a buffer to absorb buy and sell order imbalances. Unlike the NYSE spe-
cialist system, Nasdaq features multiple market makers for actively traded stocks. There are
two key differences between the NYSE and Nasdaq:

1. Nasdaq is a computer network and has no physical location where trading takes place.
2. Nasdaq has a multiple market maker system rather than a DMM system.


--- Page 21 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation 265

Traditionally, a securities market largely characterized by dealers who buy and sell secu-
rities for their own inventories is called an over-the-counter (OTC) market. Consequently, over-the-counter
Nasdaq is often referred to as an OTC market. In their efforts to promote a distinct image, (OTC) market
Nasdaq officials prefer that the term OTC not be used when referring to the Nasdaq market, _ Securities market in which
Nevertheless, old habits die hard, and many people still refer to Nasdaq as an OTC market. pcck lincss
The Nasdaq network operates with three levels of information access. Level 1 is designed buy and sell for their own
to provide a timely, accurate source of price quotations. These prices are freely available _ inventories.
over the internet.
Level 2 allows users to view price quotes from all Nasdaq market makers. In particular,
this level allows access to inside quotes. Inside quotes are the highest bid quotes and _ inside quotes
the lowest asked quotes for a Nasdaq-listed security. Level 2 is now available on the web, The highest bid quotes and the
sometimes for a small fee. Level 3 is for the use of market makers only. This access level st ask quotes for a security
allows Nasdaq dealers to enter or change their price quote information. See our nearby
Work the Web box for an example of inside quotes.
Nasdaq is actually made up of three separate markets: the Nasdaq Global Select
Market, the Nasdaq Global Market, and the Nasdaq Capital Market. As the market for
Nasdaq’s larger and more actively traded securities, the Global Select Market lists about
1,400 companies (as of late 2019), including some of the best-known companies in the Nasdaq (www.nasdaq.com)
world, such as Microsoft and Intel. Global Market companies are somewhat smaller in _ has a great website; check
size, and Nasdaq lists about 810 of these. Finally, the smallest companies listed on Nasdaq _ it out!
are in the Nasdaq Capital Market; about 820 are currently listed. Of course, as Capital
Market companies become more established, they may move up to the Global Market or
Global Select Market.

WORK THE WEB

You can actually watch trading taking place on the web by visiting markets.cboe.com/us/equities. The
CBOE Exchange is somewhat unique in that the “order book,” meaning the list of all buy and sell orders,
is public in real time. As shown below, we have captured a sample of the order book for Intel (INTC). On
the top in blue are sell orders (asks); buy orders (bids) are in green on the bottom. All orders are “limit”
orders, which means the customer has specified the most he or she will pay (for buy orders) or the least
he or she will accept (for sell orders). The inside quotes (the highest bid, or buy, and the lowest ask, or
sell) in the market are in the middle of the quotes.

If you visit the site, you can see trading take place as orders are entered and executed. Notice that on this
particular day, 326,399 shares of Intel had traded on the CBOE Exchange. At that time, the inside quotes
for Intel were 551 shares bid at $58.50 and 100 shares offered at $58.51. This is not the entire order
book for Intel, as there are more buy orders below $58.46 and more sell orders above $58.55.


--- Page 22 ---
266

Questions

PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

1. Go to markets.cboe.com/us/equities and look up the order book for Microsoft (MSFT). What are the inside
quotes for Microsoft?

2. Go to markets.cboe.com/us/equities. The website shows the 25 most active stocks. Looking down through this
list, what are the bid-ask spreads for these stocks?

electronic
communications
networks (ECNs)

A website that allows investors
to trade directly with each other.

WORK THE WEB

ECNs Ina very important development in the late 1990s, the Nasdaq system was opened
to so-called electronic communications networks (ECNs). ECNs are basically websites that
allow investors to trade directly with one another. Investor buy and sell orders placed on ECNs
are transmitted to the Nasdaq and displayed along with market maker bid and ask prices. As
a result, the ECNs open up the Nasdaq by essentially allowing individual investors, not just
market makers, to enter orders. As a result, the ECNs act to increase liquidity and competition.

Of course, the NYSE and the Nasdaq are not the only places stocks are traded. See our
nearby Work the Web box for a discussion of somewhat wilder markets.

STOCK MARKET REPORTING

In recent years, the reporting of stock prices and related information has increasingly moved
from traditional print media, such as The Wall Street Journal, to various websites. Yahoo!
Finance (finance.yahoo.com) is a good example. We went there and requested a stock quote
on wholesale club Costco, which is listed on the Nasdaq. Here is a portion of what we found:

Costco Wholesale Corporation (COST)

NasdagGS - NasdaqGS Real Time Price. Currency in USD

299.85 -0.99 (-0.33%)

As of 2:31PM EST. Market open.

88 Visitors trend 2W OWT OMT
nT

Summary Company Outlook a Chart Conversations Statistics Historical Data Profile ~~ Financials @™ = Analysis ~~ Options

Previous Close 300.84 Market Cap 131.8318 = 1D 5D 1M 6M YTD 1Y 5Y Max | wt «” Full screen
Beta (3Y 303.50
= 300.83 Monthly) -
Bid 299.24 x 800 PE Ratio (TT) 36.30 901.687
Ask 299.57 x 800 = EPS (TTM) 8.26 a
Day's Range 298.69 - 302.73 Eamings Date Dec 12, 2019
S2Week Range 189.51. 307.34 EONAR DIidend 2.69 19.96%) rg
Volume 896,376 — Ex-Dividend Date 2019-10-31
YO AN 12PM

Avg. Volume 2,144,949 ty Target Est 303.83 ‘Trade prices are not sourced trom all markets.

Where do companies trade when they can’t (or don’t want to) meet the listing requirements of the larger
stock markets? Mostly, they trade on the OTCQX®, OTCQB®, and OTC Pink® marketplaces operated by
OTC Markets Group. The OTCQX® marketplace includes qualitative and quantitative standards and the
OTCQB® marketplace imposes some requirements as well, though these requirements are less restrictive



--- Page 23 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

than those enforced by the larger stock markets. OTC Pink® is called the “Open Marketplace” because
there are no filing or financial requirements.

Asmall portion of companies also continue to trade on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board, or OTCBB,
operated by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, known as FINRA. The OTCBB began as an elec-
tronic bulletin board that was created to facilitate OTC trading in non-listed stocks. It has effectively been
replaced by OTC Markets Group’s OTCQB® marketplace as the primary marketplace for these types of
companies. Like the OTCQX® and OTCQB®, the OTCBB imposes some requirements, though they are
not as restrictive as those found in larger markets. For example, OTCBB only requires that listed firms file
financial statements with the SEC (or other relevant agency).

Trading at any of the OTC Markets Group marketplaces, as well as the OTCBB, is conducted under a
dealer-driven framework. So, aside from the minimal requirements for inclusion on these marketplaces, all
that is necessary for a particular security to begin trading is a registered broker-dealer willing (and approved)
to quote and make a market in the security. Investors can trade OTCQX®, OTCQB®, and OTC Pink® securities
in a manner similar to the trading in an exchange-listed stock. Given the ease of trading, these marketplaces
(OTCQX®, in particular) are attractive to foreign firms that file with regulators in their home countries, but do
not have interest in filing with U.S. regulators. These markets are also an option for companies that have
been delisted from the larger markets either by choice or for failure to maintain their listing requirements.

Stocks traded on these markets often have very low prices and are frequently referred to as penny stocks, microcaps,
or even nanocaps. Relatively few brokers do any research on these companies, so information is often spread through
word of mouth or the internet (not the most reliable of sources). To get a feel for what trading looks like, we captured a
typical screen from the OTCBB website (finra-markets.morningstar.com/MarketData/EquityOptions/default.jsp):

OOTC Equity

| Most Actives | % Gainers | % Losers | Exchange by| OTC ¥ |
Symbol Last Chg Chg % Vol (mil) +
PTAH ~ 0.0007 0.0001 -12.5000 195.8677
DSCR a 0.0002 0.0000 0.0000 128.8244
RDWD me 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 117.4013
SBES iw 0.0021 0.0001 -4,5455 78.1727
HQGE ~ 0.0004 0.0004 -50.0000 73.4183
SIML a 0.0003 0.0001 §2.2843 0.0000
BNGI a 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
MMEX re 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
ASCK ae 0.0002 0.0001 33.3333 0.0000
DPLS és 0.0002 0.0001 100.0000 0.0000

First, take a look at the returns. Darkpulse (DLPS) had an intraday return on this day of 100 percent.
That’s not something you see very often. Of course, the big return was generated by a whopping price
increase of $.0001 per share. A stock listed on the OTCBB is often the most actively traded stock on
any particular day. For example, by the end of this particular day, General Electric was the most active
stock on the NYSE, trading about 47.1 million shares. In contrast, PTA Holdings traded about 258 million
shares. But, at an average price of, say, $.0007 per share, the total dollar volume in PTA Holdings was
only about $180,600. In contrast, trades in General Electric amounted to about $538 million.

Allin all, the OTC markets can be pretty wild places to trade. Low stock prices allow for huge percent-
age returns on small stock price movements. Be advised that attempts at manipulation and fraud are
possible. Also, stocks on these markets are often thinly traded, meaning there is little volume. It is not
unusual for a stock listed on any of these markets to have no trades on a given day. Even two or three
days in a row without a trade in a particular stock is not uncommon.

267


--- Page 24 ---
268 PART 3 Valuation of Future Cash Flows

Questions

1. After the close of the markets (4 pm. Eastern time), go to finance.yahoo.com and find the stocks on the major
exchanges that were the most active during the day. Now go to finra-markets.morningstar.com/MarketData/
EquityOptions/default.jsp and find the most active stocks traded on the OTCBB for the same day. How many

stocks on the OTCBB were more active than the most active stock on the NYSE? The Nasdaq?
2. What were the biggest percentage winners and losers on the OTCBB during the current day? How much did
the stock price increase or decrease to account for this change?

Most of this information is self-explanatory. The price $299.85 is the real-time price of the
last trade. Availability of real-time prices for free is a relatively new development. The reported
change is from the previous day’s closing price. The opening price is the first trade of the day.

Muah get real-time We see the bid and ask prices of $299.24 and $299.57, respectively, along with the market

stock quotes on the web. “depth,” which is the number of shares sought at the bid price and offered at the ask price.
See finance.yahoo.com We also have the range of prices for this day, followed by the range over the previous
for details. 52 weeks. Volume is the number of shares traded today, followed by average daily volume

over the last three months. In the second column, Market Cap is number of shares outstand-
ing (from the most recent quarterly financial statements) multiplied by the current price
per share. The PE ratio was discussed in Chapter 3. The earnings per share (EPS) used in
the calculation is “TTM,” meaning “trailing twelve months.” Finally, we have the dividend
on the stock, which is actually the most recent quarterly dividend multiplied by 4, and the
dividend yield. Notice that the yield is the reported dividend divided by the previous stock
price: $2.60/$300.84 = .0086, or .86%. The “ly Target Est” is the average estimated stock
price one year ahead based on estimates from security analysts who follow the stock.

Concept Questions

8.3a What is the difference between a securities broker and a securities dealer?
8.3b Which is bigger, the bid price or the ask price? Why?
8.3c How does Nasdaq differ from the NYSE?

Summary and Conclusions

This chapter has covered the basics of stocks and stock valuation:

1. The cash flows from owning a share of stock come in the form of future dividends. We
saw that in certain special cases it is possible to calculate the present value of all the
future dividends and come up with a value for the stock.

2. As the owner of shares of common stock in a corporation, you have various rights, includ-
ing the right to vote to elect corporate directors. Voting in corporate elections can be either
cumulative or straight. Most voting is actually done by proxy, and a proxy battle breaks out

16 | when competing sides try to gain enough votes to elect their candidates for the board.

3. In addition to common stock, some corporations have issued preferred stock. The name
stems from the fact that preferred stockholders must be paid first, before common stock-
holders can receive anything. Preferred stock has a fixed dividend.


--- Page 25 ---
Chapter 8 Stock Valuation

4. The two biggest stock markets in the United States are the NYSE and the Nasdaq. We
discussed the organization and operation of these two markets, and we saw how stock
price information is reported.

This chapter completes Part 3 of our book. By now, you should have a good grasp of what
we mean by present value. You should also be familiar with how to calculate present val-
ues, loan payments, and so on. In Part 4, we cover capital budgeting decisions. As you will
see, the techniques you learned in Chapters 5—8 form the basis for our approach to evaluat-
ing business investment decisions.

269


