--- Page 1 ---
Chapter Eleven

The Cost of Capital

We now have a much deeper understanding of the risk-reward tradeoff and the central role systematic risk plays in
it. We now turn our attention to the corporation and focus on the risks borne by the capital providers and how those
risks influence the value of the business enterprise. To keep the story as simple as possible, we return to using the
net present value in the one-period model. Recall,

E{[cash inflows]|— [cash outflows]
1+£[r,]

NPV = initial cash flow +

Further, we assume they are conventional cash flows. Companies and projects with conventional cash flows
often have an initial massive outflow at time zero, typically due to spending CapEx to put some costly long-term
assets on the balance sheet, then have positive expected net cash flows in the future. In the net present value equation
above, the assumption establishes that the initial cash flow is an outflow. Further, it requires that the end-of-period
expected future cash inflows exceed outflows so that the time one net cash flow is positive.

The appropriate discount rate is the return on assets, 7. The assets under evaluation produce random end-of-
period inflows, so once again, the perceived risk is the anticipated volatility of the numerator, and the expected
reward for bearing it is the return on assets in the denominator.

The return on assets has to incorporate three essential aspects of any business or project. First, at a minimum, it
must cover the opportunity costs of the capital providers. For example, if bondholders require 10% yields to lend
to companies with similar risk profiles, your company must pay them at least 10% per year to attract their scarce
funding. If you offer them 9% when their next best use of similar risk is 10%, you won’t get a penny.

It is essential to recognize that it is the use of the capital providers’ funding that will define the opportunity costs.
We saw this back in Chapter Four when Ally Bank was considering a loan to Mr. Sargent. If he was going to use
the funds to buy a home that would act as collateral, the use dictated a low rate. Alternatively, if Mr. Sargent wanted
the loan to go on a gambling junket in Macau, that use necessitated a high rate. What was true then is true now. The
capital providers’ perception of the riskiness of the cash generated by the funded assets will determine precisely
what does of similar risk mean. If the funds are for a new swanky restaurant (most fail) versus a new municipal
sewage treatment plant (almost never default), the use of the deployed scarce capital determines the risk-adjusted
interest rate the capital providers demand.

Second, the return on assets has to reflect the relative importance of different sources of funding. In other words,
the discount rate must take into account how much money is coming from each type of capital provider. The logic
is straightforward. If ninety percent of the money comes from common stockholders, then ninety percent of the

Mark J. Laplante, Ph.D.
Copyright 2025. All rights reserved.
Distribution of this chapter without the written consent of the author is strictly prohibited.


--- Page 2 ---
emphasis should be on their opportunity costs. If preferred shareholders only contribute ten percent of the funding,
then the return on assets should reflect a commensurately small weight on their opportunity costs.

Third and last, the tax code treats payments to equity and debt differently. Dividends are not business expenses,
while interest payments are. Taxes represent significant stakeholder outflows for the business, and the return on
assets must reflect the fact that servicing debt is treated preferentially when compared to rewarding the owners. In
summary, the discount rate must cover opportunity costs, account for the relative importance of funding sources,
and incorporate tax realities.

In putting the return on assets together, we begin with opportunity costs. Senior debt, junior debt, preferred shares,
and common stockholders all have different priority claims, therefore varying degrees of risk exposure. Of course,
it follows that they have unequal opportunity costs. In order of priority claim, we know from our previous work that
there is the cost of debt, rp, the cost of preferred, rp, and the cost of equity, rz. Of the three sources of capital, the
opportunity costs of the lenders and preferred stockholders tend to be the easiest to estimate. That’s because
applying the law of one price in their respective cases is often a straightforward matter.

Take bonds, for example. The company can look at its outstanding bonds and easily observe their prices and
yields to maturity. The yields reflect the current market opinions about expected inflation, the compensation
necessary to wait to consume, and, importantly, duration, credit, liquidity, and reinvestment risks.

Take Allstate Insurance (ALL) as a case study. It has an American-style callable bond that matures on January
15", 2042, with a thousand-dollar face value. The company set the coupon rate of 5.2% at issuance in 2022,
reflecting the market conditions at the time. However, since then, market conditions have evolved and are
unsurprisingly not what they were in 2022. Therefore, the coupon rate is irrelevant when it comes to the prevailing
preferences of bondholders. It’s current fixed-income yields produced by current bond market conditions that
capture today’s opportunity costs. Given Allstate’s Fitch credit rating of BBB+, it is now a discount bond trading
for $959.90 with a yield to maturity of 5.56%. If current Allstate bondholders require 5.56% to bear Allstate’s
perceived risks, then Allstate would have to pay at least 5.56% to attract funding from new lenders. In reality, any
new bonds Allstate issues would no doubt be junior to the existing bonds, so the current coupon rate the market
would demand would undoubtedly be above 5.56% because a new issue would be junior to the existing bonds.
Moreover, Allstate’s managers would look at what similar bonds yield in order to gain a deeper understanding of
the current pulse of the fixed-income market. Altogether, the yield on Allstate’s existing bonds and those of similar
bonds provides the company with an excellent estimate of its immediate cost of debt.

It’s a similar story for the cost of preferred. Managers will look at the present state of the secondary market to
infer today’s preferred stockholders’ opportunity costs. Recall from Chapter Eight,

The present value is the current market price. The cost of preferred in the denominator incorporates the perceived
risk of the expected dividend stream in the numerator. Solving for the cost of preferred yields the equation below.


--- Page 3 ---
The cost of preferred is simply the stock’s dividend yield, which we can figure out for Allstate. The insurance
company has noncumulative series J preferred stock. It has a face value of $25 and a dividend rate of 7.375% with
quarterly payments. That comes to 46¢ per share every three months. Series J is callable for $25 a share on July
17", 2028. Standard & Poor’s rates the stock BBB minus, which is the lowest investment grade. Given these
characteristics, the price is $27.79. We calculate the dividend yield below.

_ 0.46

=—— =0.01655272
27.79

ao

That’s about 1.66% per quarter, which is an annual percentage rate of 6.62%. Again, Allstate’s managers would
gauge the preferred market to confirm that their 6.62% is in line with the returns on similar shares. Assuming that
is the case, 6.62% per annum is Allstate’s cost of preferred. They would have to offer that expected return or more
to attract preferred capital, given the market’s present climate.

The fixed-income and preferred secondary markets allow managers to estimate current opportunity costs for
those capital providers readily. The securities have known cash flows that the corporation is supposed to pay. They
also have credit ratings, call features, and other characteristics that allow for relatively easy identification of the
next best investments of similar risk. Common stock is a tougher nut to crack. It doesn’t have to pay anything ever.
In addition, because common stock never matures and does not have a call date, it never has to converge to a value.
In short, it’s a lot tougher to identify the next best investment.

Despite the challenges, we do have two models we can deploy to estimate the cost of equity: the dividend growth
model and the security market line. We begin with the dividend approach. For a dividend aristocrat with steadily
growing dividends, recall the equation below from Chapter Eight.

The cost of equity is the stock’s dividend yield plus capital gains yield, which, in this case, is the dividend growth
rate.

Fortunately, Allstate Insurance pays regular quarterly dividends, so we should be able to use the dividend
discount approach to estimate its cost of equity. However, when using actual data, things often aren’t as simple as
the model indicates. In Allstate’s case, it regularly raised its dividends for sixteen years in a row, and then the
financial crisis of 2008 struck. To weather the storm and preserve cash, Allstate slashed its dividend by half. Well,
that certainly violates the constantly growing forever assumption. Nonetheless, we try to do the best we can with
the data we have. The estimated annual dividend growth rate was 9.9% before 2008 and 10.0% thereafter. Setting
aside black swans, the data suggests 10% is a decent approximation for Allstate’s annual dividend growth.

Allstate’s stock price is $196.31, and if it maintains its current trajectory, it will pay $3.68 as dividends next
year. Substituting and solving, we get the result below.

3.68

— + 0.10 = 0.118746
196.31

rp =

The dividend growth approach estimates Allstate’s cost of equity at 11.87% per year, which is very close to the
S&P500’s historical average of 12% annually. The data suggests Allstate’s shareholders demand nearly 12% per
year to assume the position of the residual claimants.


--- Page 4 ---
We know from our previous work that the dividend discount model is conceptually sound but limited in its
application because many firms pay irregular dividends or none at all. Fortunately, we can use the security market
line approach for all stocks, not just those that pay regular dividends. An additional advantage of using the CAPM
is how it handles risk. The dividend discount model incorporates risk implicitly through the stock’s price.
Presumably, the higher the risk, the lower the price.

In contrast, the security market line explicitly incorporates risk with the beta coefficient. You can see exactly
what beta’s role is in pricing the stock’s expected return. Recall from the last chapter, it is the equation below.

Ta aly +B (ti, -7)

To apply the CAPM, we first need to determine the yield on Treasury bills. According to treasury.gov, the going
annual rate is 4.80%. Next, we must estimate the expected return on the market portfolio and the stock’s beta. We
approximate the market’s expected risk premium as 8.70%. That is the historical average return of the S&P500
above the T-bill’s rate. For the beta, it is a common practice to regress five years of a stock’s monthly returns on
the market proxy’s returns. For Allstate, the procedure produces an estimated beta of 0.50, so it appears the
insurance company has half the sensitivity to systemic shocks as the market portfolio. Substituting the riskless rate
and our estimated parameters into the SML, we estimate Allstate’s cost of equity below.

Tatistate,u

= 4.80 +0.50(8.70) = 9.15

According to this model, the expected 9.15% annual shareholder compensation is significantly lower than the
dividend discount’s 11.87%. What to make of the difference? On some level, it’s not terribly surprising. For the
reasons mentioned earlier, we think it’s harder to estimate the opportunity costs of common stockholders than it is
for those of bonds and preferreds. The fact that we get more dispersed estimates seems a natural result of operating
in more challenging territory. Taking an average of the two would hopefully negate some of each model’s inherent
estimation error. If true, (11.87 + 9.15) + 2 = 10.51% is about as good as we can hope to do.

Summarizing Allstate Insurance’s capital providers’ current opportunity costs, we have the following rankings.

bondholders 5.56%
Series J preferred shareholders 6.62%
common stockholders 10.51%

The results are encouraging since the estimated annual rates increase as priority claims diminish. Along that same
line, since we view preferred stock as a hybrid security with features of both bonds and stocks, its expected return
falls between the two, though its return is much closer to that of fixed income. The data indicate that the perceived
risk of being a common shareholder is substantially greater than that of the other capital providers. Allstate’s owners
demand a much greater reward than the others, which is entirely consistent with capital market history and the
equity premium puzzle.

Step One. Estimate the risk-adjusted compensation that the capital providers demand to fund the enterprise. Check.
Step Two. Account for the relative importance of the different funding sources. We do this through the capital
structure weights. A capital structure weight is the percentage of a company’s funding that comes from a particular
source, say, sixty percent from common stock. The sum of the capital structure weights must sum to one to account
for all the capital providers. For example, many startups have a capital structure weight of equity equal to one,


--- Page 5 ---
meaning they finance the company entirely with stock. In contrast, a regulated public electric utility like Duke
Energy has a capital structure weight of equity of only thirty-eight percent. Duke’s sixty-two percent capital
structure weight of debt makes up the difference. Duke has a lot of bondholders, while the startup has none. Neither
has preferred.

As we calculate those percentages, it is critical that we base them on current market values and ignore historical
values. To illustrate the issue, Spirit Airlines issued 455,622 5-year notes at par value, which was $1,000 apiece.
However, due to a failed merger with JetBlue, mechanical issues with its Pratt & Whitney engines that grounded
significant chunks of its fleet, and repeated credit downgrades landing it at CCC, the price of a Spirit bond fell to
$395. Undoubtedly, the low price and 74.04% YTM reflect the swirling rumors that Spirit would soon file for
bankruptcy protection. So, what is the value of Spirit’s outstanding bonds? Is it 455,622*$1,000 = $455,622,000 or
455,622x$395 = $179,970,690?

It is the much smaller $180 million. Using historical values ignores up-to-date information. The $395 bond price
reflects the conditional expectations of the current bondholders, given the long string of bad news they’ve received
since issuance and their view that they may have to fight it out in bankruptcy court. It’s what’s going on now that
matters, not what transpired somewhere back on the timeline, and the capital structure weights must reflect it. Lastly,
that’s a cautionary comment on balance sheets, which may report past book values, not current market-based ones.
Duly warned, let’s use Allstate’s market values to calculate its capital structure weights.

market value of debt = bond price x bonds outstanding = 959.90 x 10 million = $9,599 million

market value of preferred = preferred share price x shares outstanding = 27.79 x 82 million = $2,278.78 million
market value of equity = share price x shares outstanding = 196.31 x 265 million = $52,022.15 million

The total value of Allsate’s marketable claims is 9,590 + 2,278.78 + 52,022.15 = $63,899.93 million

Given current market conditions and the conditional expectations of the capital providers, their aggregate claims
come to nearly $64 billion. With the total value in hand, we can now calculate Allstate’s three capital structure
weights. They are as follows.

capital structure weight of debt: wp = 9,599 = 63,899.93 = 0.1502 or 15.0%, rounded
capital structure weight of preferred: wp = 2,278.78 + 63,899.93 = 0.0357 or 3.6% rounded
capital structure weight of equity: wz = 52,022.15 + 63,899.93 = 0.8141 or 81.4%, rounded

Clearly, Allstate’s paramount funding source is its common stockholders, and it follows that their opportunity costs
should get the most emphasis in the return on assets. At the other end of the spectrum are the preferred shareholders
who contributed the least, and accordingly, their opportunity costs should play a much smaller role in the return on
assets. Bondholders fall in between the two. Of course, market prices fluctuate daily, implying the capital structure
weights will too. Given that fact, and for the sake of simplicity, we round Allstate’s weights as follows: wp = 15%,
wp = 4%, and we =81%.

Now for step three—taxes. The Internal Revenue Service views interest expenditures as a legitimate business

expense and allows firms to deduct them when calculating their tax bills. That is not true for common and preferred
dividends, so they are not deductible. This has an important implication: interest reduces taxes, but dividends don’t.


--- Page 6 ---
Let’s illustrate the point with a simple numerical example. Allstate’s bonds have a coupon rate of 5.2% and $10
billion of face value. That means Allstate makes $520 million of interest-only payments every year, all tax
deductible. Consider the values in millions below.

No Interest Interest

EBIT 6,000 6,000

Interest expense 0 520
tax—20% 1,200 1,096

Allstate’s deductible interest expense produces tax savings of $104 million. From Allstate’s viewpoint, that is a
significant $104 million inflow. The coupon payments are a $520 million outflow. The net cost to Allstate of using
debt financing is 520 — 104 = $416 million. On $10 billion of face value, the after-tax cost of Allstate’s bond
financing is 4.16%, not 5.20%. We call Allstate’s true cost to service its bonds the after-tax cost of debt. In general,
it is rp(1 — 4), where rp is the pretax cost of debt and ¢ is the tax rate the corporation faces. To confirm the result
above, 5.20%(1 — 0.20) = 4.16%. Excellent.

A critical point we will explore in detail in the next chapter is that the government is subsidizing Allstate’s use
of debt financing. Allstate is willing to pay 5.20% to borrow a dollar, but because of tax policy, it only pays 4.16%.
That’s a 104 bps government-backed subsidy. There is no subsidy for the cost of equity and preferred because
dividends aren’t a business expense. Therefore, the after-tax costs of equity and preferred are rz and rp, respectively.
In other words, the government distorts capital markets by playing favorites with the tax code. It provides companies
with an extra tax incentive to fund with debt instead of equity. Put another way, how much of the subsidized
mispriced thing would you want?

We will address that question later. For now, it’s Step Four. Bring it all together. Drum roll, please... The return on
assets is the weighted average cost of capital (WACC), pronounced “whack!” It combines the capital providers’
opportunity costs, their relative funding importance, and tax consequences into the equation below.

Ty =Wgl'g + Wplp (1-6) + Welty

The weighted average cost of capital is the company’s overall minimum rate of return its assets must generate to
satisfy its capital providers, taking the tax code as given. For Allstate, we calculate their WACC below with the
current federal corporate income tax rate of twenty-one percent.

Tengaee = 0-81 10.51% + 0.15% 5.56% (1—0.21) + 0.04 x 6.62% = 9.44%

The data indicate that Allstate’s assets need to produce annual returns of 9.44% to satisfy the expectations of its
common stockholders, bondholders, and preferred shareholders. Note, in reality, determining Allstate’s 9.44%
weighted average cost of capital is a much more complicated endeavor than we’ve presented here. Allstate doesn’t
have one bond issue, but as of this writing, it has thirteen bonds. They all have different times to maturity, priority
claims, call features, and other material characteristics that translate into thirteen different yields to maturity.
Similarly, there are series H and I preferred shares in addition to J. The large number of claims makes calculating
Allstate’s WACC a bit of a pain, but conceptually, it’s no big deal. Allstate’s cost of debt is the value-weighted
average of the yields on its thirteen bond issues, and its cost of preferred is the value-weighted average of the
expected returns on its three preferred series. Despite the extra busy work to account for these realities, every


--- Page 7 ---
manager in every treasury department at every public company on planet Earth knows their corporation’s weighted
average cost of capital to the basis point just as well as their own phone number. No doubt about it.
Consider the weighted average cost of capital in the broader context of the value equation below.

E{[cash inflows]|— [cash outflows]

NPV = initial cash flow +
1+ Welz + Wpl'p (1-1) + Wor

Suppose you project both the initial and end-of-period expected cash flows, then use the weighted average cost of
capital to discount the future values one period, and the resulting net present value is identically equal to zero. What
does that mean? A couple of things, actually. First, it means that the WACC you used is, in fact, the internal rate of
return. That’s because, by definition, the internal rate of return is the discount rate that sets the net present value
equal to zero. In other words, it’s the return the investment will generate, given the initial investment outflow.

Second, and more importantly, it’s saying this. We expect the investment will precisely cover the capital
providers’ opportunity costs and not a basis point more nor a penny less. If somebody says to you, “Pll pay you
9.44% per year,” while your next best investment of similar risk pays 9.44% annually, how would you choose
between the two investments with identical risk-reward tradeoffs? Probably like any genuinely indifferent capital
provider, by shrugging, then taking a quarter out of your pocket and letting it decide where your scarce capital lands.

Making capital providers indifferent is not the point of the business enterprise. The point is to make them better
off. Investing in Allstate, a startup, Duke Energy, or any project proposed by a treasury department should be the
highest-valued use of somebody’s money, given the risks borne. That’s how you attract their money. In light of that
insight, consider an alternative narrative. Discounting with WACC produces a hugely positive net present value
winner, where the internal rate of return is hundreds of basis points above the weighted average cost of capital. How
does that change the telling of the story? Oh, it changes—big time.

Let’s tell the story in order of priority claim. Is it a good thing that an investment generates cash inflows far in
excess of the contractually obligated lender claims, reducing the credit risk to nil? Why, yes, it is, both for the
creditor and the company. Is it good for the preferred shareholders that the company is able to make its quarterly
dividend payouts in perpetuity without going into arrears? Why, yes, it is. Now for the whopper. Is it good for the
common stockholders that the company’s assets will produce enough cash to cover all the expected stakeholder,
creditor, and preferred claims and still have enough money left over to make their next best investment look like a
pathetic risk-adjusted loser? The third time’s a charm. Why, yes, yes, it is. Writ large, that’s the point of positive
net present value endeavors. They benefit every party tied to the nexus of contracts. That’s not a zero-sum game.
It’s winners right down the line, well, perhaps not for the company’s competitors. Okay, we will use a couple of
bucks of that enormous value creation and generously send them a box of Kleenex to wipe their tears. Schumpeter
would love it—creative destruction at its best. Google it.

Using the company’s weighted-average cost of capital as the discount rate when applying discounted cash flow
analysis is appropriate only when the proposed investment is similar to the firm’s existing activities. This is not as
restrictive as it sounds. Consider Pizza Hut, which has more than six thousand U.S. locations. Suppose headquarters
wants to build a new restaurant in Waunakee, Wisconsin, with dine-in, carryout, and delivery services. In that case,
the project’s expected cash outflows and inflows should look very similar to those of the thousands of other red-
roofed huts, and using the company’s WACC as the discount rate is appropriate. If the treasury department
concludes the endeavor is a value-popping positive NPV slam dunk, then no one will outpizza the hut in the only
Waunakee in the world.


--- Page 8 ---
Similar assumptions are valid for a retailer thinking of a new store, a manufacturer considering expanding
production, or a consumer products company considering expanding its markets. For many firms, the project under
evaluation has a similar risk profile to the existing operation; hence, the weighted-average cost of capital is the
suitable discount rate. Despite the usefulness of the WACC as a benchmark, there will clearly be situations in which
the cash flows under consideration have risks distinctly different from those of the overall firm. We consider how
to cope with this problem next.

When we are evaluating investments with risks that are substantially different from those of the overall firm, the
use of the company’s weighted average cost of capital will potentially lead to poor decisions. The figure below
illustrates why.

SML

%

= 8.6%

incorrect
acceptance

correct acceptance

Hi = 13,0 }--------------------- 22a °
WACC = 12.0

Lo= 11.0 }----------------- °
imcorrect

rejection

y=34 correct rejection

fBuo= 0.50 Boo= 1.0 fu= 150 Beta

The figure plots a security market line corresponding to a risk-free intercept of 3.4 percent and a market risk
premium slope of 8.6 percent, where both values are close to their long-run historical averages. To keep things
simple, we consider an all-equity company with a beta of one. We further assume the company is funded entirely
with common stock, so its weighted average cost of capital collapses to the cost of equity, which is twelve percent
in this case.

Suppose our firm uses its WACC to evaluate all investments. This means that the company will accept any
investment with an internal rate of return greater than twelve percent, and reject anything with less than that. We
know from our study of risk and return that a desirable investment plots above the SML. As the figure illustrates,
using the WACC for all types of projects can result in the firm incorrectly accepting relatively risky projects and
incorrectly rejecting relatively safe ones.

Consider Project Lo. This project has a beta of 0.50, as compared to the firm’s beta of 1.0. It has an expected
return of 11 percent. Is this a desirable investment? The answer is yes because according to the security market line,
its required return is only:

Maly + Batu —%)

r, =3.4+0.5x8.6=7.7%

If we use the WACC as a cutoff, then we will reject the project because its return is less than the company’s WACC
of 12 percent. The company will reject Lo despite the fact that the project plots above the security market line,

8


--- Page 9 ---
making it a positive NPV winner. This example illustrates that a firm that uses its WACC as a cutoff will tend to
reject profitable projects with risks less than those of the overall firm, including those that might boost the share
price.

At the other extreme, consider Project Hi. This project has a beta of 1.5. It offers a 13 percent return, which
exceeds the firm’s cost of capital by a hundred basis points. Nonetheless, this is not a good investment because,
given its level of systematic risk, its return is inadequate. It plots below the security market line, which means it’s
a value-destroying loser. If the firm uses its WACC as the benchmark return, Hii will wrongly appear to be
attractive. So, the second error that will arise if the company uses its WACC as a one-size-fits-all required return is
that it will tend to make unprofitable investments with risks greater than those of the overall firm.

The figure highlights that there are consequential mistakes made in the triangles. Of course, the company does
accept value-creating projects while avoiding share-busting trainwrecks outside of the highlighted error area.
However, as a long-lived fictional person that may evaluate dozens, even hundreds, of potential investments over
the decades, it will have a systematic bias in rejecting low-risk winners while accepting high-risk losers. As a
consequence, ignoring the bias through time, a firm that uses its weighted average cost of capital to evaluate all
projects will tend to both accept unprofitable investments and become increasingly risky.

The same type of problem with the WACC can arise in a corporation with more than one line of business.
Imagine a corporation that has two divisions: a regulated electric company and an electronics manufacturing
operation. The first of these (the electricity operation) has a relatively low risk; the second has a relatively high risk.
In this case, the firm’s overall cost of capital is really a mixture of two different costs of capital, one for each
division. If the two divisions were competing for resources, and the firm used a single WACC as a cutoff, which
division would tend to be awarded more significant funds for investment?

The answer is that the riskier division would tend to have greater returns (ignoring the greater risk), so it would
tend to be the “winner.” The less glamorous operation might have great risk-adjusted profit potential that would
end up being ignored. The resulting bias would see CapEx decisions more often landing in favor of the riskier
division at the expense of the less volatile division. Large corporations in the United States are aware of this
problem, and many work to develop separate divisional costs of capital.

We’ve seen that using the firm’s cost of capital inappropriately can lead to problems. How can we come up with
the appropriate discount rates in such circumstances? Because we cannot observe the returns on these investments,
there is generally no direct way of coming up with a beta. Instead, what we must do is examine other investments
outside the firm that are in the same risk class as the one we are considering and use the market-required return on
these investments as the discount rate. In other words, we will try to determine the cost of capital for such
investments by trying to locate some similar investments in the marketplace. In short, we will try to arrive at the
appropriate discount rate by applying the law of one price.

Going back to our electricity division, suppose we wanted to come up with an appropriate risk-adjusted discount
rate to use for its potential projects. What we could do is identify several other electric companies that have publicly
traded securities. We might find that a typical publicly traded electric company has a beta of 0.80, AA-rated debt,
and a capital structure that is about 50 percent debt and 50 percent equity. Using this information, we could develop
a cost of capital for a typical electric company and use this as our discount rate. For instance, if the estimated return
required for American Electric Power (AEP) is 16% per annum, then it’s probably reasonable to use 16% for DCF
evaluation of the electricity division’s investments.


--- Page 10 ---
Alternatively, if we were considering entering a new line of business, we would try to develop the appropriate
cost of capital by looking at the market-required returns on companies already in that business. In the language of
Wall Street, a company that focuses on a single line of business is called a pure play. If you wanted to bet on the
price of crude oil by purchasing common stocks, you would try to identify companies that deal exclusively with
this product because they would be the most affected by changes in the price of crude oil. Such companies would
be called “pure plays on the price of crude oil.”

What we try to do here is to find companies that focus as exclusively as possible on the type of project in which
we are interested. Our approach, therefore, is called the pure play approach to estimating the required return on an
investment. To illustrate, suppose McDonald’s decides to enter the cell phone and tablet business with a line of
electronics called McPhones. The risks involved are quite different from those in the fast-food industry. As a result,
McDonald’s would need to look at companies already in the consumer electronics business to compute a cost of
capital for the new division. Two possible choices are Apple and Samsung, but neither is ideal. Apple has entered
music, television, and content production, all of which have different risks. Samsung sells products such as
televisions and appliances, which are not equally risky. As a result, it would be difficult to find a true pure play
company.

In practice, it can be pretty challenging to identify similar companies for comparison purposes. We may not be
able to find any suitable companies that allow for the legitimate application of the law of one price. In this case,
objectively determining a discount rate becomes a difficult question. Even so, the important thing is to be aware of
the issue so that we at least reduce the possibility of the kinds of mistakes that can arise when the company uses its
overall cost of capital as a cutoff on all investments.

Because of the difficulties that exist in objectively establishing discount rates for individual projects, firms often
adopt an approach that involves the managers using their analysis, experience, and collective business wisdom to
apply the subjective approach, making “best-guess” adjustments to the firm’s overall WACC. To illustrate,
suppose a firm has a cost of capital of fifteen percent. It places all proposed projects into four categories as follows:

Risk Discount
Category Examples Adjustment Rate
Greater risk Entirely new products & services 6% 18%
Similar risk Expanding existing product lines none 12%
Lower risk Equipment replacement, cost reduction -4% 8%
Mandatory Regulatory compliance pollution control not applicable not applicable

The effect of this crude partitioning is to assume that all projects either fall into one of three risk classes or else are
mandatory. In the last case, the cost of capital is irrelevant. Regulatory requirements at the local, state, or federal
level demand that the company undertake projects if it wishes to continue operating. Limits on CO2 emissions and
investments to reduce them immediately come to mind.

With the subjective approach, the firm’s cost of capital may change over time as economic conditions evolve,
perhaps due to updated expectations about anticipated inflation, revised forecasts of output, or time-varying
perceptions of market risk. As this happens, the discount rates for the different types of projects will also change.
Within each risk class, some projects will presumably have more risk than others, and the danger of making incorrect
decisions still exists. The figure on the next page illustrates this point.

Comparing the earlier figure where the company’s cost of capital was the required return for all projects to the
one below, we see that similar problems exist. There are still regions where the treasury department incorrectly

10


--- Page 11 ---
% Low risk Similar risk High risk SML "truth"

WACC = 12.0

8.0

cut 400 bps no adjustment add 600 bps

Beta

accepts investments it shouldn’t, and rejects others it should pursue. However, the subjective approach reduces the
total area in which mistakes are made. In short, making educated guesses about the risk profile of a project and
adjusting its required return accordingly reduces the probability of making a bad CapEx allocation.

In fact, upon a bit of reflection, cutting down the likelihood of errors under the subjective approach is an intuitive
result. The one-size-fits-all cost of capital for any project mistake completely ignores the empirical fact that there
is a risk-reward tradeoff. It’s literally saying, “Risk doesn’t matter. Use twelve percent for everything!” One ignores
capital market history at the peril of the shareholders’ wealth. Unsurprisingly, the company never truly achieves
value-maximization. The subjective approach accounts for the risk-reward tradeoff, albeit crudely. Where the
unobservable truth of the security market line gives a unique expected return for any level of systematic risk, the
subjective approach creates three risk bins: low, same, and high. By roughly incorporating the risk-return reality,
making educated guesses will do better on average than ignoring capital market history entirely.

An additional advantage of the subjective approach over doing nothing is that when mistakes get made, the
average magnitude of the error will be smaller. The distance an investment’s expected return falls away from the
security market line is a measure of mispricing. A project way above the SML is too cheap and will have a hugely
positive net present value. Alternatively, projects falling far below the SML are much too expensive and are share-
killing disasters waiting to happen. By using three required returns instead of one, the CFO significantly reduces
the absolute height of a mistake from the security market line.

Consider Project Di. If the treasury department evaluates it using the company’s 12% cost of capital, the
endeavor gets the green light. Unfortunately, it’s miles below the opportunity cost given by the CAPM for that level
of systematic. It’s accepting a project with an internal rate of return of 12.25% when the next best investment of
similar risk pays 19%. Such a colossal mistake could become a financial black hollow that could swallow the
company. However, the crude high-risk-adjusted return of 18% saves the day by handily rejecting Project Di for
what it is, a terrible use of the company’s scarce capital.

In principle, it would be better to objectively determine the required return for each project separately. As a
practical matter, it may not be possible to go much beyond subjective adjustments because either the necessary
information is unavailable or the cost and effort required are not worthwhile. Though it’s not perfect by any stretch

11


--- Page 12 ---
of the imagination, the subjective approach lowers the probability of making a bad choice and reduces the average
size of mistakes when they happen. In combination, making thoughtful risk-reward determinations when assessing
projects decreases the expected value of costly mistakes compared to doing nothing.

We conclude our discussion of the weighted average cost of capital by turning our attention to the costs of issuing
securities to raise the necessary funds for a hopefully profitable endeavor. As we saw in the business process in
Chapter Two, if a company accepts a new project, it may decide to issue, or float, new bonds and stocks in the
public markets with the assistance of investment bankers. In doing so, the firm will incur some potentially
significant expenses, which we call flotation costs.

Some people recommend that the way to incorporate flotation costs into the capital budgeting process is to adjust
the firm’s weighted average cost of capital upward to cover the issuance costs. This approach is conceptually flawed
because, once again, the required return on an investment depends on the perceived risky use of the funding by the
capital providers, not the source of the money. This is not to say that flotation costs should be ignored. Because
these costs arise as a consequence of the decision to undertake a project, they are relevant cash flows in that they
will occur if and only if the company pursues the opportunity. Let’s think carefully about how to include them in
project analysis.

We start with a simple case. The Spatt Company, an all-equity firm, has a cost of equity of 20 percent. Because
this firm is 100 percent equity, its cost of capital is simply and completely its cost of equity. Spatt is contemplating
a large-scale, $100 million expansion of its existing operations. The company plans to fund the expansion by selling
new shares of common stock. Based on conversations with Lazard, the investment bank it hired to float the shares,
Spatt believes its flotation costs will run six percent of the amount raised. This means that Spatt’s proceeds from
the equity sale will be only 94 percent of the total amount sold. When accounting for the flotation costs, what is the
cost of the expansion?

Spatt needs to sell enough equity to raise $100 million after covering the flotation costs. In other words:

$100 million = (1 — 0.06) x Amount raised
Rearranging, Amount raised = $100 million + (1 — 0.06) = $106.38 million

The expected fees to Lazard for helping to place the shares total $6,380,00. The actual cost to Spatt of the expansion
is $106.38 million, once we include flotation costs, not the $100 in PPE expenditures.

Things are only slightly more complicated if the firm uses both debt and equity. Suppose Spatt’s target capital
structure is 60 percent equity and 40 percent debt. The flotation costs associated with equity are still six percent,
but the flotation costs for debt are usually less, perhaps three percent. Earlier, when we had different capital costs
for debt and equity, we calculated a weighted average cost of capital using the target capital structure weights. Here,
we will do much the same thing. We can calculate a weighted average flotation cost, f;, by multiplying the equity
flotation cost, fz, by the percentage of funding from equity, plus the debt flotation cost, fp, by the percentage of debt
funding. Combining the terms, we get:

Ja=WeXfe +woxfo (1)
Substituting Spatt’s values into Equation 1,

fa = 0.60 x 0.06 +0.40 x 0.03 = 0.048, or 4.8%


--- Page 13 ---
The weighted average flotation cost is 4.8 percent. What this tells us is that for every dollar in outside financing
needed for new projects, the firm must actually raise $1 + (1 — 0.048), or about $1.0504 for every dollar it needs
for the investment under consideration. In our example, the project cost is $100 million when we ignore flotation
costs. If we include them, then the true cost is:

$100 million + (1 — f4) = $100 million + 0.952 = $105,042,016.80

Suppose that the estimated present value of Spatt’s expansion of its existing operations is $105 million. Ignoring
the flotation costs, the project appears to create $5 million of value, which one would think should improve the
stock price. However, the more than $5 million of fees paid to Lazard for its investment banking services are checks
Spatt will have to write if and only if they proceed with the expansion. These are significant and material outflows
that Spatt will incur if it pursues the project. Correct project analysis requires their inclusion and, in doing so, flips
the project from a positive share-boosting winner to a share price-wrecking loser. The conclusion is clear. Flotation
costs can be significant, and correctly including them in the capital budgeting analysis can change a “Yes, do it.” to
a “No, don’t do it.”

Our discussion of flotation costs to this point implicitly assumes that firms always have to raise the capital
needed for new investments. A couple of issues bear mentioning before we conclude. First, the investment banking
fees for helping a company issue preferred stock can differ from those for bonds and common stock. We can readily
incorporate such a possibility into the average flotation cost by including the percentage of total funding raised by
issuing preferreds and its unique flotation cost. We expand the average flotation cost below.

Sa = We X fe + wo * fot wp * fp

Second, in reality, most firms rarely sell equity at all. Instead, they use their accumulated internally generated
equity, which we saw in the business process, rather than raising the money from new outside owners. Often, the
cash on hand for expansions and acquisitions is sufficient to cover the equity portion of their capital spending,
exemplified by tech giants like Apple and Microsoft. In this scenario, the company only raises the debt portion of
the project’s funding externally, necessitating the use of investment bankers and their almost inescapable fees for
floating the bonds. Nonetheless, the use of internal equity doesn’t change our approach. We now assign a value of
zero to the flotation cost of equity because there is no such cost. In our Spatt example, the weighted average flotation
cost would be:

fa=we * fe + wo * fo
fa = 0.60 x 0.0 +0.40 x 0.03 = 0.012, or 1.2%

Notice that whether the corporation generates equity internally by retaining cash from prior operations or gets it
externally through primary market placements makes a big difference. Externally sourced equity has relatively high
flotation costs, while using internal equity capital constitutes a huge savings, making it more likely the company
will find and accept value-maximizing economic pursuits. Apple knows it. Microsoft knows it. Now you know it,
future business leader of America.


