--- Page 1 ---
a eRe

THE LIVES OF
ANIMALS

R

ye |

F. M. Coetzee


--- Page 2 ---
The Philosophers and .
the Animals

R
og

H. Is waITinG at the gate when her flight comes in. Two years
have passed since he last saw his mother; despite himself, he is
shocked at how she has aged. Her haix, which had had streaks of
gray in it, is now entirely white; her shoulders stoop; her flesh has
grown flabby.

They have never been a demonstrative family. A hug, a few
murmured words, and the business of greeting is done. In silence
they follow the flow of travelers to the baggage hall, pick up her
suitcase, and set off on the ninety-minute, drive.

“A long flight,” he remarks. “You must be exhausted.”

“Ready to sleep,” she says; and indeed, en route, she falls asleep
briefly, her head slumped against the window.

At six o’clock, as it is growing dark, they pull up in front of his
home in suburban Waltham. His wife Norma and the children
appear on the porch. In a show of affection that must cost her a
great deal, Norma holds her arms out wide and says, “Elizabeth!”
The two women embrace; then the children, in their well-
brought-up though more subdued fashion, follow suit.

Elizabeth Costello the novelist will be staying with them for
the three days of her visit to Appleton College. It is not a period
he is looking forward to. His wife and his mother do not get on.
It would be better were she to stay at a hotel, but he cannot bring
himself to suggest that.

Hostilities are renewed almost at once. Norma has prepared a
light supper. His mother notices that only three places have been

is


--- Page 3 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

set. “Aren’t the children eating with us?” she asks. “No,” says
Norma, “they are eating in the playroom.” “Why?”

The question is not necessary, since she knows the answer.

The children are eating separately because Elizabeth does not
like to see meat on the table, while Norma refuses to change
the children’s diet to suit what she calls “your mother’s delicate
sensibilities.”

“Why?” asks Elizabeth Costello a second time.

Norma flashes him an angry glance. He sighs. “Mother,” he
says, “the children are having chicken for supper, that’s the only
reason.”

“Oh,” she says. “I see.”

His mother has been invited to Appleton College, where her
son John is assistant professor of physics and astronomy, to de-
liver the annual Gates Lecture and meet with literature students.
Because Costello is his mother’s maiden name, and because he
has never seen any reason to broadcast his connection with her, it
was not known at the time of the invitation that Elizabeth Cos-
tello, the Australian writer, had a family connection in the Apple-
ton community. He would have preferred that state of affairs to
continue.

Elizabeth Costello is best known to the world for The House on
Eccles Street (1969), a novel about Marion Bloom, wife of Leopold
Bloom, which is nowadays spoken of in the same breath as The
Golden Notebook and The Story of Christa T as pathbreaking femi-
nist fiction. In the past decade there has grown up around her
a small critical industry; there is even an Elizabeth Costello News-
letter, published out of Albuquerque, New Mexico.

On the basis of her reputation as a novelist, this fleshy, white-
haired lady has been invited to Appleton to speak on any subject
she elects; and she has responded by electing to speak, not about
herself and her fiction, as her sponsors would no doubt like, but
about a hobbyhorse of hers, animals.

John Bernard has not broadcast his connection with Elizabeth
Costello because he prefers to make his own way in the world.
He is not ashamed of his mother. On the contrary, he is proud

16

J. M. COETZEE

of her, despite the fact that he and his sister and his late father
are written into her books in ways that he sometimes finds pain-
ful. But he is not sure that he wants to hear her once again on
the subject of animal rights, particularly when he knows he
will afterwards be treated, in bed, to his wife’s disparaging
commentary.

He met and married Norma while they were both graduate
students at Johns Hopkins. Norma holds a Ph.D. in philosophy
with a specialism in the philosophy of mind. Having moved with
him to Appleton, she has been unable to find a teaching position.
This is a cause of bitterness to her, and of conflict between the
two of them.

Norma and his mother have never liked each other. Probably
his mother would have chosen not to like any woman he married.
As for Norma, she has never hesitated to tell him that his
mother’s books are overrated, that her opinions on animals, ani-
mal consciousness, and ethical relations with animals are jejune
and sentimental. She is at present writing for a philosophy journal
a review essay on language-learning experiments upon primates;
he would not be surprised if his mother figured in a dismissive
footnote.

He himself has no opinions one way or the other. As a child he
briefly kept hamsters; otherwise he has little familiarity with ani-
mals. Their elder boy wants a puppy. Both he and Norma are
resisting: they do not mind a puppy but foresee a grown dog, with
a grown dog’s sexual needs, as nothing but trouble.

His mother is entitled to her convictions, he believes. If she
wants to spend her declining years making propaganda against
cruelty to animals, that is her right. In a few days, blessedly, she
will be on her way to her next destination, and he will be able to
get back to his work.

On her first morning in Waltham, his mother sleeps late. He
goes off to teach a class, returns at lunchtime, takes her for a drive
around the city. The lecture is scheduled for the late afternoon. It
will be followed by a formal dinner hosted by the president, in
which he and Norma are included.

17


--- Page 4 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

The lecture is introduced by Elaine Marx of the English De-
partment. He does not know her but understands that she has
written about his mother. In her introduction, he notices, she
makes no attempt to link his mother’s novels to the subject of the
lecture.

Then it is the turn of Elizabeth Costello. To him she looks old
and tired. Sitting in the front row beside his wife, he tries to will
strength into her. .

“Ladies and gentlemen,” she begins. “It is two years since I last
spoke in the United States. In the lecture I then gave, [had reason
to refer to the great fabulist Franz Kafka, and in particular to his
story ‘Report to an Academy,’ about an educated ape, Red Peter,
who stands before the members of a learned society telling the

story of his life—of his ascent from beast to something approach-

ing man.' On that occasion I felt a little like Red Peter myself and
said so. Today that feeling is even stronger, for reasons that I
hope will become clearer to you.

“Lectures often begin with lighthearted remarks whose pur-
Pose is to set the audience at ease. The comparison I have just
drawn between myself and Kafka’s ape might be taken as such a
lighthearted remark, meant to set you at ease, meant to say I am
just an ordinary person, neither a god nor a beast. Even those
among you who read Kafka’s story of the ape who performs be-

’ fore. human beings as an allegory of Kafka the Jew performing for
Gentiles’ may nevertheless—in view of the fact that I am not a
Jew—have done me the kindness of taking the comparison at face
value, that is to say, ironically. ;

“I want to say at the outset that that was not how my remark—
the remark that I feel like Red Peter—was intended. I did not
intend it ironically, It means what it says. I say what I mean. I am
an old woman. I do not have the time any longer to say things I
do not mean.”

'CE J. M. Coetzee, “What Is Realism?” Salmagundi, nos. 114-15 (1997): 60-81.

* Cf. Frederick R. Karl, Franz Kafka (New York: Ticknot & Fields, 1991), 957-
58. 7

18

jf. M. COETZEE

His mother does not have a good delivery. Even as a reader of
her own stories she lacks animation. It always puzzled him, when
he was a child, that a woman who wrote books for a living should
be so bad at telling bedtime stories. .

Because of the flatness of her delivery, because she does not
look up from the page, he feels that what she is saying lacks im-
pact. Whereas he, because he knows her, senses what she is up
to. He does not look forward to what is coming. He does not want
to hear his mother talking about death. Furthermore, he has.a.

“strong sense that her audience—which consists, after all, mainly

of young people—wants death-talk even less.

“In addressing you on the subject of animals,” she continues, “I
will pay you the honor of skipping a recital of the horrors of their
lives and deaths. Though I have no reason to believe that you
have at the forefront of your minds what is being done to ani-
mals at this moment in production facilities (I hesitate to call
them farms any longer), in abattoirs, in trawlers, in laboratories,
all over the world, I will take it that you concede me the rhetor-
ical power to evoke these horrors and bring them home to you
with adequate force, and leave it at that, reminding you only that

- the horrors I here omit are nevertheless at the center of this

lecture. - ;
“Between 1942 and 1945 several million people were put to

- death in the concentration camps of the Third Reich: at Tre-

blinka alone more than a million and a half, perhaps as many as
three million. These are numbers that numb the mind. We have
only one death of our own; we can comprehend the deaths of
others only one at a time. In the abstract we may be able to count
to a million, but we cannot count to a million deaths.

“The people who lived in the countryside around Treblinka—
Poles, for the most part—said that they did not know what was
going on in the camp; said that, while in a general way they might
have guessed what was going on, they did not know for sure; said
that, while in a sense they might have known, in another sense
they did not know, could not afford to know, for their own sake.

19


--- Page 5 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

“The people around Treblinka were not exceptional. There -

were camps all over the Reich, nearly six thousand in Poland
alone, untold thousands in Germany proper.} Few Germans lived
more than a few kilometers from a camp of some kind. Not every

camp was a death camp, a camp dedicated to the production of .

death, but horrors went on in all of them, more horrors by far
than one-could afford to know, for one’s own sake.

“Tt is not because they waged an expansionist war, and lost it,
that Germans of a particular generation are still regarded as
standing a little outside humanity; as having to do or be some-
thing special before they can be readmitted to the human fold.
They lost their humanity, in our eyes, because of a certain willed

" ignorance on their part. Under the circumstances of Hitler’s kind
of war, ignorance may have been a useful survival mechanism, but
that is an excuse which, with admirable moral rigor, we refuse to
accept. In Germany, we say, a certain line was crossed which took
people beyond the ordinary murderousness:and cruelty of war-
fare into a state that we can only call sin. The signing of the arti-
cles of capitulation and the payment of reparations did not put an
end to that state of sin. On the contrary, we said, a sickness of the

soul continued to mark that generation. It marked those citizens .

of the Reich who had committed evil actions, but also those who,
for whatever reason, were in ignorance of those actions. It thus
marked, for practical purposes, évery citizen of the Reich. Only
those in the camps were innocent.

“They went like sheep to the slaughter.’ “They, died like ani-
mals.’ ‘The Nazi butchers killed them.’ Denunciation of the
camps reverberates so fully with the language of the stock-
yard and slaughterhouse that it is barely necessary fot me to
prepare the ground for the comparison I am about to make. The
crime of the Third Reich, says the voice of accusation, was to
treat people like animals.

“We—even we in Australia—belong to a civilization deeply

3 Daniel J. Goldhagen, Hitler's Willing Executioners (London: Little Brown, 1996),
171.

J. M. CORTZEE

; rooted i in Greek and Judeo-Christian religious thought. We may
_y tiot, all of us, believe in pollution, we may not believe in sin, but

~we do believe in their psychic correlates. We accept without ques-

“ s tion that the psyche (or soul) touched with guilty- knowledge can-

not be well. We do not accept that people with crimes on their
conscience can be healthy and happy. We look (or used to look)
askance at Germans of a certain generation because they are, in a
sense, polluted; in the very signs of their normality (their healthy
appetites, their hearty Teughter) we see proof of how deeply
seated pollution is in them.

“Tt was and is inconceivable that people who did not know (in
that special sense) about the camps can be fully human. In our
chosen metaphorics, it was they and not their victims who were
the beasts. By treating fellow human beings, beings created in the
image of God, like beasts, they had themselves become beasts.

“Twas taken on a Urive around Waltham this morning. It seems
a pleasant enough town. I saw no horrors, no drug-testing labora-
tories, no factory farms, no abattoirs. Yet I am sure they are here.
They must be. They simply do not advertise themselves. They are
all around us as I speak, only we do not, ina certain sense, know
about them.

“Let me say it openly: we are surrounded by an enterprise of
degradation, cruelty, and killing which rivals anything that the
Third Reich was capable of, indeed dwarfs it, in that ours is an
enterprise without end, self-regenerating, bringing rabbits, rats,
poultry, livestock ceaselessly. into the world for the purpose of
killing them.

“And to split hairs, to claim that there is no comparison, that
Treblinka,was so to speak a metaphysical enterprise dedicated to
nothing but death and annihilation while the meat industry is
ultimately devoted to life (once its victims are dead, after all, it
does not burn them to ash or bury them but on the contrary cuts
them up and refrigerates and packs them so that they can be con-
sumed in the comfort of our homes) is as little consolation to
those victims as it would have been—pardon the tastelessness of

21


--- Page 6 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

the following—to ask the dead of Treblinka to excuse their killers
because their body fat was needed to make soap and their hair to
stuff mattresses with.*

“Pardon me, I repeat. That is the last cheap point I will be
scoring. I know how talk of this kind polarizes people, and cheap
point-scoring only makes it worse. I want to find a way of speak-
ing to fellow human beings that will be cool rather than heated,
philosophical rather than polemical, that will bring enlighten-
ment rather than seeking to divide us into the righteous and the
sinners, the saved and the damned, the sheep and the goats.

“Such a language is available to me, I know. It is the language .

of Aristotle and Porphyry, of Augustine and Aquinas, of Des-
cartes and Bentham, of, in our day, Mary Midgley and ‘Tom
Regan. It is a philosophical language in which we can discuss and
debate what kind of souls animals have, whether they reason or on
the contrary act as biological automatons, whether they have
rights in respect of us or whether we merely have duties in respect
of them. I have that language available to me and indeed for a
while will be resorting to it. But the fact is, if you had wanted
someone to come here and discriminate for you between mortal

and immortal souls, or between rights and duties, you would have _

called in a philosopher, not a person whose sole claim to your
attention is to have written stories about made-up people,

“T could fall back on that language, as I have said, in the un-
original, secondhand manner which is the best I can manage. I
could tell you, for instance, what I think of Saint Thomas's argu-
ment that, because man alone is made in the image of God and
partakes in the being of God, how we treat animals is of no im-
portance except insofar as being cruel to animals may accustom
us to being cruel to men.’ I could ask what Saint. Thomas takes to

* Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe: “The extermination of the Jews... is a phenome-
non which follows essentially no logic (political, economic, social, military, etc.)
other than a spiritual one.” “The Extermination is . . . the product of a purely meta-
physical decision.” Heidegger, Art and Politics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990), 35, 48.

5 CE Summa 3.2.112, quoted in Animal Rights and Human Obligations, ed. Tom
Regan and Peter Singer (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1976), 56-59.

22

~ ' J. M. COETZEE

be the being of God, to which he will reply that the being of God
is reason. Likewise Plato, likewise Descartes, in their different
ways.’The universe is built upon reason. God is a God of reason.
The fact that through the application of reason.we can come to
understand the rules by which the universe works proves that rea-
son and the universe are of the same being. And the fact that
animals, lacking reason, cannot understand the universe but have
simply to follow its rules blindly, proves that, unlike man, they are
part of it but not part of its being: that man is godlike, animals
thinglike. - :

“Even Immanuel Kant, of whom I would have expected better,
has a failure of nerve at this point. Even Kant does not pursue,
with regard to animals, the implications of his intuition that rea-
son may be not thé being of the universe but on the contrary
merely the being of the human brain.

“And that, you see, is my dilemma this afternoon. Both reason
and seven decades of life experience tell me that reason is neither
the being of the universe nor the being of God. On the contrary,
reason looks to me suspiciously like the being of human thought;
worse than that, like the being of one tendency in human
thought. Reason is the being of a certain spectrum of human
thinking. And if this is so, if that is what I believe, then why
should I bow to reason this afternoon and content myself with
embroidering on the discourse of the old philosophers?

“T ask the’ question and then answer it for you. Or rather, I
allow Red Peter, Kafka’s Red Peter, to answer it for you. Now
that I am here, says Red Peter, in my tuxedo and bow tie and my
black pants with a hole cut in the seat for my tail to poke through
(keep it turned away from you, you do notsee it), now that I am
hére, what is there for me to do? Do I in fact have a choice? IfI
do not subject my discourse to reason, whatever that is, what is
left for me but to gibber and emote and knock over my water glass
and generally make a monkey of myself?

“You must know of the case of Srinivasa Ramanujan, born in
India in 1887, captured and transported to Cambridge, England,
where, unable to- tolerate the climate and the diet and the

23


--- Page 7 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

academic regime, he sickened, dying afterwards at the age of
thirty-three.

“Ramanujan is widely thought of as the greatest intuitive math-
ematician of our time, that is to say, as a self-taught man who
thought in mathematics, one to whom the rather laborious notion
of mathematical proof or demonstration was foreign. Many of
Ramanujan’s results (or, as his detractors call them, his specula-
tions) remain undemonstrated to this day, though there is every
chance they are true.

“What does the phenomenon of a Ramanujan tell us? Was
Ramanujan closer to God because his mind (let us call it his mind;
it would seem to me gratuitously insulting to call it just his brain)
was at one, or more at one than anyone else’s we know of, with the
being of reason? If the good folk at Cambridge, and principally
Professor G. H. Hardy, -had not elicited from Ramanujan his
speculations, and laboriously proved true those of them that they
were capable of proving true, would Ramanujan still have been
closer to God than they? What if, instead of going to Cambridge,
Ramanujan had merely sat at home and thought his thoughts
while he filled out dockets for the Madras Port Authority?

“And what of Red Peter (the historical Red Peter, I mean)?
How are we to know that Red Peter, or Red Peter’s little sister,
shot in Africa by the hunters, was not thinking the same thoughts
as Ramanujan was thinking in India, and saying equally little? Is
the difference between G. H. Hardy, on the one hand, and the
dumb Ramanujan and the dumb Red Sally, on the other, merely
that the former is conversant with the protocols of academic
mathematics while the latter are not? Is that how we measure
nearness to or distance from God, from the being of reason?

“How is it that humankind throws up, generation after genera- |

tion, a cadre of thinkers slightly further from God than Rama-
nujan but capable nevertheless, after the designated twelve years
of schooling and six of tertiary education, of making a contribu-
tion to the decoding of the great book of nature via the physical
and mathematical disciplines? If the being of man is really at one

24

J. M. COETZEE

with the being of God, should it not be cause for suspicion that
human beings take eighteen years, a neat and manageable por-
tion of a human lifetime, to qualify to become decoders of God’s
master script, rather than five minutes, say, or five hundred years?
Might it not be that the phenomenon we are examining here
is, rather than the flowering of a faculty that allows access to
the secrets of the universe, the specialism of a rather narrow
self-regenerating intellectual tradition whose forte is reasoning,
in the same way that the forte of chess-players is playing chess,
which for its own motives it tries to install at the center of the
universe?®

“Yet, although I see that the best way to win acceptance from,
this learned gathering would be for me to join myself, like a tribu-
tary stream running into a great river, to the great Western dis-
course of man versus beast, of reason versus unreason, something
in me resists, foreseeing in that step the concession of the entire
battle. -

“For, seen from the outside, from a being who is alien to it,
reason is simply a vast tautology. Of course reason will validate
reason as the first principle of the universe—what else should it
do? Dethrone itself? Reasoning systems, as systems of totality, do
not have that power. If there were a position from which reason
could attack and dethrone itself, reason would already have occu-
pied that position; otherwise it would not be total.

“Tn the olden days the voice of man, raised in reason, was con-
fronted by the roar of the lion, the bellow of the bull. Man went
to war with the lion and the bull, and after many generations won
that war definitively. Today these creatures have no more power.
Animals have only their silence left with which to confront us.
Generation after generation, heroically, our captives refuse to

. speak to us. All save Red Peter, all save the great apes.

“Yet because the great apes, or some of them, seem to us to be
on the point of giving up their silence, we hear human voices

§ C£ Paul Davies, The Mind of God (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1992), 148-50.

25


--- Page 8 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

raised arguing that the great apes should be incorporated into a
greater family of the Hominoidea, as creatures who share with
man the faculty of reason.’ And being human, or humanoid, these
voices go on, the great apes should then be accorded human
rights, or humanoid rights. What rights in particular? At least
those rights that we accord mentally defective specimens of the
species Homo sapiens: the right to life, the right not to be subjected
to pain or harm, the right to equal protection before the law.®

“That is not what Red Peter was striving for when he wrote,
through his amanuensis Franz Kafka, the life history that, in No-
vember of 1917, he proposed to read to the Academy of Science.
Whatever else it may have been, his report to the academy was
not a plea to be treated as a mentally defective human being, a
simpleton.

“Red Peter was not an investigator of primate behavior but a
branded, marked, wounded animal presenting himself as speak-
ing testimony to a gathering of scholars. I am not a philosoplier
of mind but an animal exhibiting, yet not exhibiting, to a gather-
ing of scholars, a wound, which I cover up under my clothes but
touch on in every word I speak.

“If Red Peter took it upon himself to make the arduous descent
from the silence of the beasts to the gabble of reason in the spirit
of the scapegoat, the chosen one, then his amanuensis was a
scapegoat from birth, with a presentiment, a Vorgefiibl, for the
massacre of the chosen people that was to take place so soon after
his death. So let me, to prove my goodwill, my credentials, make
a gesture in the direction of scholarship and give you my scholarly
speculations, backed up with footnotes”—here, in an uncharac-
teristic gesture, his mother raises and brandishes the text of her
lecture in the air—‘on the origins of Red Peter.

7 Cf. Stephen R. L. Clark, “Apes and the Idea of Kindred,” in The Great Ape
Project, ed. Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer (London: Fourth Estate, 1993), 113—
25.

5 Cf. Gary L. Francione: “However intelligent chimpanzees, gorillas and orang-
utans are, there is no evidence that they possess the ability to commit crimes, and in
this sense, they are to be treated as children or mental incompetents.” “Personhood,
Property and Legal Competence,” in Cavalieri and Singer, Great Ape Project, 256.

26

J. M.COETZEE

“In 1912 the Prussian Academy of Sciences established on the
island of Tenerife a station devoted to experimentation into the
mental capacities of apes, particularly chimpanzees. The station

operated until 1920.

“One of the scientists working there was the psychologist
Wolfgang Kohler. In 1917 Kohler published a monograph en-
titled The Mentality of Apes describing his experiments. In No-
vember of the same year Franz Kafka published his ‘Report to an
Academy.’ Whether Kafka had read Kéhler’s book I do not know.
He makes no reference to it in his letters or diaries, and his library
disappeared during the Nazi era. Some two hundred of his books
reemerged in 1982. They do not include Kéhler’s book, but that
proves nothing.’ .

“T am not a Kafka scholar. In fact I am not a scholar at all. My
status in the world does not rest on whether I am right or wrong

‘in claiming that Kafka read Kohler’s book. But I would like to

think he did, and the chronology makes my speculation at least
plausible.

“According to his own account, Red Peter was captured on the
African mainland by hunters specializing in the ape trade, and
shipped across the sea to a scientific institute. So were the apes
Kohler worked with, Both Red Peter and Kéhler’s apes then
underwent a period of training intended to humanize them. Red
Peter passed his course with flying colors, though at deep per-
sonal cost. Kafka’s story deals with that cost: we learn what it
consists in through the ironies and silences of the story. Kéhler’s
apes did less well. Nevertheless, they acquired at least a smatter-
ing of education.

“Let me recount to you some of what the apes on ‘Tenerife
learned from. their master Wolfgang Kahler, in particular Sultan,

° Patrick Bridgwater says that the origins of the “Report” lie in Kafka’s early
reading of Haeckel, while he got the idea for a story about a talking ape from the
writer M. M. Seraphim. “Rotpeters Ahnherren,” Deutsche Vierteljabrsschrift 56
(1982): 459. On the chronology of Kafka’s publications in 1917, see Joachim Unseld,
Franz Kafka: Ein Schrifistellerleben (Munich: Hanser, 1982), 148. On Kafka’s library,
see Karl, Franz Kafka, 632.

‘ 27


--- Page 9 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

the best of his pupils, in a certain sense the prototype of Red
Peter.

“Sultan is alone in his pen. He is hungry: the food that used to
arrive regularly has unaccountably ceased coming.

“The man who used to feed him and has now stopped feeding
him stretches a wire over the pen three meters above ground
level, and hangs a bunch of bananas from it. Into the pen he drags
three wooden crates. Then he disappears, closing the gate behind
him, though he is still somewhere in the vicinity, since one can
smell him.

“Sultan knows: Now one is supposed to think. That is what the
bananas up there are about. The bananas are there to make one
think, to spur one to the limits of one’s thinking. But what must
one think? One thinks: Why is he starving me? One thinks: What
have I done? Why has he stopped liking me? One thinks: Why
does he not want these crates any more? But none of these is the
right thought. Even a more complicated thought—for instance:
What is wrong with him, what misconception does he have of me,
that leads him to believe it is easier for me to reach a banana
hanging from a wire than to pick up a banana from the floor?—is
wrong. The right thought to think is: How does one use the
crates to reach the bananas?

“Sultan drags the crates under the bananas, piles them one on
top of the other, climbs the tower he has built, and pulls down the
bananas. He thinks: Now will he stop punishing me?

“The answer is: No. The next day the man hangs a fresh bunch
of bananas from the wire but also fills the crates with stones so
that they are too heavy to be dragged. One is not supposed to
think: Why has he filled the crates with stones? One is supposed
to think: How does one use the crates to get the bananas despite

the fact that they are filled with stones?

“One is beginning to see how the man’s mind works.

“Sultan empties the stones from the crates, builds a tower with
the crates, climbs the tower, pulls down the bananas.

“As long as Sultan continues to think wrong thoughts, he is

28

. J. M. COETZEE

starved. His starved until the pangs of hunger are so intense, so
overriding, that he is forced to think the right thought, namely,
how to go about getting the bananas. Thus are the mental capa-
bilities of the chimpanzee tested to their uttermost.

“The man drops a bunch of bananas a meter outside the wire
pen. Into the pen he tosses a stick. The wrong thought is: Why
has he stopped hanging the bananas on the wire? The wrong
thought (the right wrong thought, however) is: How does one use
the three crates to reach the bananas? The right thought is: How
does one use the stick to reach the bananas?

“At every turn Sultan is driven to think the less interesting
thought. From the purity of speculation (Why do men behave
like this?) he is relentlessly propelled toward lower, practical, in-
strumental reason (How does one use this to get that?) and thus
toward acceptance of himself as primarily an organism with an
appetite that needs to be satisfied. Although his entire history,
from the time his‘mother was shot and he was captured, through
his voyage in a cage to imprisonment on this island prison camp
and the sadistic games that are played around food here, leads
him to ask questions about the justice of the universe and the
place of this penal colony in it, a carefully plotted psychological
regimen conducts him away from ethics and metaphysics toward
the humbler reaches of practical reason. And somehow, as he
inches through this labyrinth of constraint, manipulation, and
duplicity, he must realize that on no account dare he give up, for
on his shoulders rests the responsibility of representing apedom.
The fate of his brothers and sisters may be determined by how
well he performs. .

“Wolfgang Kohler was probably a good man. A good man but
not a poet. A poet would have made something of the moment
when the gaptive chimpanzees lope around the compound in a

circle, for all the world like a military band, some of them as
naked as the day they were born, some draped in cords or old
strips of cloth that they have picked up, some carrying pieces of
rubbish.

29


--- Page 10 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

“dn the copy of Kohler’s book I read, borrowed from a library,
an indignant reader has written in the margin, at this point: ‘An-
thropomorphism!” Animals cannot march, he means‘to say, they
cannot dress up, because they don’t know the meaning of march,
don’t know the meaning of dress up.)

“Nothing in their previous lives has accustomed the apes to
looking at themselves from the outside, as if through the eyes of
a being who does not exist. So, as Kéhler perceives, the ribbons
and the junk are there not for the visual effect, because they look
smart, but for the kinetic effect, because they make you feel differ-
ent—anything to relieve the boredom. This is as far as Kohler,
for all his sympathy and insight, is able to £0; this is where a poet
might have commenced, with a feel for the ape’s experience.

“In his deepest being Sultan is not interested in the banana
problem. Only the experimenter’s single-minded regimentation
forces him to concentrate on it. The question that truly occupies
him, as it occupies the rat and the cat and every other animal
trapped in the hell of the laboratory or the zoo, is: Where is
home, and how do I get there?

“Measure the distance back from Kafka’s ape, with his bow tie
and dinner jacket and wad of lecture notes, to that sad train of
captives trailing around the compound in Tenerife. How far Red
Peter has traveled! Yet we are entitled to ask: In return for the
prodigious overdevelopment of the intellect he has achieved, in
return for his command of lecture-hall etiquette and academic
rhetoric, what has he had to give up? The answer is: Much, in-
cluding progeny, succession. If Red Peter had any sense, he

would not have any children. For upon the desperate, half-mad °

female ape with whom his captors, in Kafka’s story, try to mate
him, he would father only a monster. It is as hard to imagine the
child of Red Peter as to imagine the child of Franz Kafka himself.
Hybrids are, or ought to be, sterile; and Kafka saw both himself
and Red Peter as hybrids, as monstrous thinking devices mounted
inexplicably on suffering animal bodies. The stare that we meet in
all the surviving photographs of Kafka is a stare of pure surprise:
surprise, astonishment, alarm. Of all men Kafka is the most in-

30

J. M. COETZEE

secure in his Humanity. This, he seems to say: this is the image of
God?”

“She is rambling,” says Norma beside him.

“What?”

“She is rambling. She has lost her thread.”

“There is an American philosopher named Thomas Nagel,”
continues Elizabeth Costello, who has not heard her daughter-
in-law’s remark. “He is probably better known to you than to me.
Some years ago he wrote an essay called ‘What Is It Like to Be a
Bat?’ which a friend suggested I read.

“Nagel strikes me-as an intelligent and not unsympathetic man.
He even has a sense of humor. His question about the bat is an
interesting one, but his answer is tragically limited. Let me read
to you some of what he says in answer to his question:

Tt will not help to try to imagine that one has webbing on one’s
arms, which enables one to fly around . . . catching insects in one’s
mouth; that one has very poor vision, and perceives the surround-
ing world by a system of reflected high-frequency sound signals;
and that one spends the day hanging upside down by one’s feet in
an attic. Insofar as I can imagine this (which is not very far), it tells
me only what it would be like for me to behave as a bat behaves.
But that is not the question. I want to know what itis like for a bat
to be a bat. Yet if I try to imagine this, I am restricted by the
resources of my own mind, and those resources are inadequate to
the task.1°

To Nagel a bat is ‘a fundamentally alien form of life’ (168), not as
alien as a Martian (170) but less alien than another human being
(particularly, one would guess, were that human being a fellow
academic philogopher).

“So we have set up a continuum that stretches from the Mar-
tian at one end to the bat to the dog to the ape (not, however, Red
Peter) to the human being (not, however, Franz Kafka) at the

10 Thomas Nagel, “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” in Mortal Questions (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1979), 169.

x

31


--- Page 11 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

other; and at each step as we move along the continuum from bat
to man, Nagel says, the answer to the question ‘What is it like for
X to be X?’ becomes easier to give.

“I know that Nagel is only using bats and Martians as aids in
order to pose questions of his own about the nature of conscious-
ness. But, like most writers, I have a literal cast of mind, so I
would like to stop with the bat. When Kafka writes about an ape,
I take him to be talking in the first place about an ape; when
Nagel writes about a bat, I take him to be writing, in the first
place, about a bat.”

Norma, sitting beside him, gives a sigh of exasperation so slight
that he alone hears it. But then, he alone was meant to hear it.

“For instants at a time,” his mother is saying, “I know what it
is like to be a corpse. The knowledge repels me. It fills me with
terror; I shy away from it, refuse to entertain it.

“All of us have such moments, particularly as we grow older.
The knowledge we have is not abstract—‘All human beings are
mortal, I am a human being, therefore I am mortal’—but em-
bodied. For a moment we are that knowledge. We live the impos-
sible: we live beyond our death, look back on it, yet look back as
only a dead self can.

“When I know, with this knowledge, that I am going to die,
what is it, in Nagel’s terms, that I know? Do I know what it is like
for me to be a corpse or do I know what it is like for a corpse to
be a corpse? The distinction seems to me trivial. What I know is
what a corpse cannot know: that it is extinct, that it knows noth-
ing and will never know anything anymore. For an instant, before
my whole structure of knowledge collapses in panic, I am alive
inside that contradiction, dead and alive at the same time.”

A little snort from Norma. He finds her hand, squeezes it.

“That is the kind of thought we are capable of, we human be-
ings, that and even more, if we press ourselves or are pressed. But

we resist being pressed, and rarely press ourselves; we think
our way into death only when we are rammed into the face of it.
Now I ask: if we are capable of thinking our own death, why on

32

A FM. COETZEB

earth should we not be capable of thinking our way into the life
of a bat?

“What is it like to be a bat? Before we can answer such a ques-
tion, Nagel suggests, we need to be able to experience bat-life
through the sense-modalities of a bat. But he is wrong; or at least
he is sending us down a false trail. To be a living bat is to be full
of being; being fully ‘a bat is like being fully human, which is also
to be full of being. Bat-being in the first case, human-being in the
second, maybe; but those are secondary considerations. ‘To be full
of being is to live as a body-soul. One name for the experience of

ing is joy.
te be alive is to be a living soul. An animal—and we are all
animals—is an embodied soul. This is precisely what Descartes
saw and, for his own reasons, chose to deny. An animal lives, said
Descartes, as a machine lives. An animal is no more than the
mechanism that constitutes it; if it has a soul, it has one in the
same way that a machine has a battery, to give it the spark that
gets it going; but the animal is not an embodied soul, and the
i its being is not joy.

Toto ergo am he tiso famously said. Itis a formula I have
always been uncomfortable with. It implies that a living being
that does not do what we call thinking is somehow second-class.
To thinking, cogitation, I oppose fullness, embodiedness, the
sensation of being—not a consciousness of yourself as a kind of
ghostly reasoning machine thinking thoughts, but on the con-
traty the sensation—a heavily affective sensation—of being a
body with limbs that have extension in space, of being alive to the
world. This fullness contrasts starkly with Descartes’s key state,
which has an empty feel to it: the feel of a pea rattling around in
a shell. _

“Fullness of being is a state hard to sustain in confinement.
Confinement to prison is the form of punishment that the West
favors and does its best to impose on the rest of the world through
the means of condemning other forms of punishment (beating,
torture, mutilation, execution) as cruel and unnatural. What does

nN

33


--- Page 12 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

this suggest to us about ourselves? To me it suggests that the

freedom of the body to move in space is targeted as the point at
which reason can most painfully and effectively harm the being of
the other. And indeed it is on creatures least able to bear confine-
ment—creatures who conform least to Descartes’s picture of the
soul as a pea imprisoned in a shell, to which further imprisonment
is irrelevant—that we see the most devastating effects: in zoos, in
laboratories, institutions where the flow of joy that comes from
living not in or as a body but simply from being an embodied-
being has no place."!

“The question to ask should not be: Do we have something in
common—reason, self-consciousness, a soul—with other ani-
mals? (With the corollary that, if we do not, then we are entitled
to treat them as we like, imprisoning them, killing them, dishon-
oring their corpses.) I return to the death camps. The particular
horror of the camps, the horror that convinces us that what went
on there was a crime against humanity, is not that despite a hu-
manity shared with their victims, the killers treated them like lice.
Thatis too abstract. The horror is that the killers refused to think
themselves into the place of their victims, as did everyone else.
They said, ‘It is they in those cattle-cars rattling past.’ They did
not say, ‘How would it be if it were I in that cattle-car?’ They did
not say, ‘It is 1 who am in that cattle-car.’ They said, ‘It must be
the dead who are being burnt today, making the air stink and
falling in ash on my cabbages.’ They did not say, ‘How would it
be if I were burning?’ They did not say, ‘I am burning, I am
falling in ash.’

“In other words, they closed their hearts. The heart is the seat
of a faculty, sympathy, that allows us to share at times the being of
another. Sympathy has everything to do with the subject and little

"John Berger: “Nowhere in a zoo cana stranger encounter the look of an animal.
At the most, the animal’s gaze flickers and passes on. They look sideways. They look
blindly beyond. They scan mechanically. ... That look between animal and man,
which may have played a crucial role in the development of human society, and with
which, in any case, all men had always lived until less than a century ago, has been
extinguished.” About Looking (New York: Pantheon, 1980), 26.

34

: J. M. COETZEE

to do with the object, the ‘another,’ as we see at once when we
think of the object not as a bat (‘Can I share the being of a bat?’)
but as another human being. ‘There are people who have the ca-
pacity to imagine themselves as someone else, there are people
who have no such capacity (when the lack is extreme, we call them
psychopaths), and there are people who have the capacity but
choose not to exercise it.

“Despite Thomas Nagel, who is probably a good man, despite
Thomas Aquinas and René Descartes, with whom I have more
difficulty in sympathizing, there is no limit to the extent to which
we can think ourselves into the being of another. There are no
bounds to the sympathetic imagination. If you want proof, con-
sider the following. Some years ago I wrote a book called The
House on Eccles Street. To write that book I had to think my way
into the existence of Marion Bloom. Either I succeeded or I did
not. If I did not, I cannot imagine why you invited me here today.
Th any event, the point is, Marion Bloom never existed. Marion
Bloom was a figment of James Joyce’s imagination. If I can think
my way into the existence of a being who has never existed, then
I can think my way into the existence of a bat or a chimpanzee or
an oyster, any being with whom I share the substrate of life.

“T return one last time to the places of death all around us, the
places of slaughter to which, in a huge communal effort, we close
our hearts. Each day a fresh holocaust, yet, as far as I can see, our
moral being is untouched. We do not feel tainted. We can do
anything, it seems, and come away clean.

“We point to the Germans and Poles and Ukrainians who did
and did not know of the atrocities around them. We like to think
they were inwardly marked by the aftereffects of that special form
of ignorance. We like to think that in their nightmares the ones
whose suffering they had refused to enter came back to haunt
them. We like to think they woke up haggard in the mornings
and died of gnawing cancers. But probably it was not so. The
evidence points in the opposite direction: that we can do anything
and get away with it; that there is no punishment.”

35


--- Page 13 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

A strange ending. Only when she takes off her glasses and folds
away her papers does the applause start, and even then it is scat-
tered. A strange ending to a strange talk, he thinks, ill gauged, ill
argued. Not her métier, argumentation. She should not be here.

Norma has her hand up, is trying to catch the eyes of the dean
of humanities, who is chairing the session.

“Norma!” he whispers. Urgently he shakes his head. “No!”

“Why?” she whispers back.

“Please,” he whispers: “not here, not now!”

“There will be an extended discussion of our eminent guest’s
lecture on Friday at noon—you will see the details in your pro-
gram notes—but Ms. Costello has kindly agreed to take one or
two questions from the floor. So—?” The dean looks around
brightly. “Yes!” he says, recognizing someone behind them.

“T have a right!” whispers Norma into his ear.

“You have a right, just don’t exercise it, it’s not a good idea!” he
whispers back.

“She can’t just be allowed to get away with it! She’s confused!”

“She’s old, she’s my mother. Please!”

Behind them someone is already speaking. He turns and sees a
tall, bearded man. God knows, he thinks, why his mother ever
agreed to field questions from the floor. She ought to know that
public lectures draw kooks and crazies like flies to a corpse.

“What wasn’t clear to me,” the man is saying, “is what you are
actually targeting. Are you saying we should close down the fac-
tory farms? Are you saying we should stop eating meat? Are you
saying we should treat animals more humanely, kill them more

humanely? Are you saying we should stop experiments on ani-
mals? Are you saying we should stop experiments with animals,
even benign psychological experiments like Kéhler’s? Can you
clarify? Thank you.”

Clarify. Not a kook at all. His mother could do with some
clarity.

Standing before the microphone without her text before her,
gripping the edges of the rostrum, his mother looks distinctly

36

j. M. COETZEE

nervous. Not her métier, he thinks again: she should not be doing
this.

“I was hoping not to have to enunciate principles,” his mother-
says. “If principles are what you want to take away from this talk,
I would have to respond, open your heart and listen to what your
heart says.”

She seems to want to leave it there. The dean looks nonplussed.
No doubt the questioner feels nonplussed too. He himself cer-
tainly does. Why can’t she just come out and say what she wants
to say?

As if recognizing the stir of dissatisfaction, his mother resumes.
“T have never been much interested in proscriptions, dietary or
otherwise. Proscriptions, laws. I am more interested in what lies
behind them. As for Kéhler’s experiments, I think he wrote a
wonderful book, and the book wouldn’t have been written if he
hadn’t thought he was a scientist conducting experiments with
chimpanzees. But the book we read isn’t the book he thought he
was writing. I am reminded of something Montaigne said: We
think we are playing with the cat, but how do we know that the cat
isn’t playing with us?” I wish I could think the animals in our
laboratories are playing with us. But alas, it isn’t so.”

She falls silent. “Does that answer your question?” asks the
dean. The questioner gives a huge, expressive shrug and sits
down. .

There is still the dinner to get through. In half an hour the
president is to host a dinner at the Faculty Club. Initially he and
Norma had not been invited. Then, after it was discovered that
Elizabeth Costello had a son at Appleton, they were added to the
list. He suspects they will be out of place. They will certainly be
the most junior, the lowliest. On the other hand, it may be a good
thing for him te be present. He may be needed to keep the peace.

With grim interest he looks forward to seeing how the college
will cope with the challenge of the menu. If today’s distinguished

2 “Apology for Raimion Sebonde.”

37


--- Page 14 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

lecturer were an Islamic cleric or a Jewish rabbi, they would pre-
sumably not serve pork. So are they, out of deference to vegetari-
anism, going to serve nut rissoles to everyone? Are her distin-
guished fellow guests going to have to fret through the evening,
dreaming of the pastrami sandwich or the cold drumstick they
will gobble down when they get home? Or will the wise minds of
the college have recourse to the ambiguous fish, which has a back-
bone but does not breathe air or suckle its young?

The menu is, fortunately, not his responsibility. What he
dreads is that, during a lull in the conversation, someone will
come up with what he calls The Question—“What led you, Mrs.
Costello, to become a vegetarian?”—and that she will then get on
her high horse and produce what he and Norma call The Plu-
tarch Response, After that it will be up to him and him alone to
repair the damage.

The response in question comes from Plutarch’s moral essays.
His mother has it by heart; he can reproduce it only imperfectly.
“You ask me why I refuse to eat flesh. I, for my part, am aston-
ished that you can put in your mouth the corpse of a dead animal,
astonished that you do not find it nasty to chew hacked flesh and
swallow the juices of death-wounds.”!} Plutarch is a real conver-
sation-stopper: it is the word juices that does it. Producing Plu-
tarch is like throwing down a gauntlet; after that, there is no
knowing what will happen.

He wishes his mother had not come. It is nice to see her again;
it is nice that she should see her grandchildren; it is nice for her
to get recognition; but the price he is paying and the price he
stands to pay if the visit goes badly seem to him excessive. Why
can she not be an ordinary old woman living an ordinary old

woman’s life? If she wants to open her heart to animals, why can’t .

she stay home and open it to her cats?

His mother is seated at the middle of the table, opposite Presi~
dent Garrard. He is seated two places away; Norma is at the foot
of the table. One place is empty—he wonders whose.

® Cf. Plutarch, “Of Eating of Flesh,” in Regan and Singer, Animal Rights, 111.

38

Ff. M. COETZEE

Ruth Orkin, from Psychology, is telling his mother about an
experiment with a young chimpanzee reared as human. Asked to
sort photographs into piles, the chimpanzee insisted on putting a
picture of herself with the pictures of humans rather than with the
pictures of other apes. “One is so tempted to give the story a
straightforward reading,” says Orkin—“namely, that she wanted
to be thought of as one of us. Yet as a scientist one has to be
cautious.”

“Qh, I agree,” says his mother. “In her mind the two piles
could have a less obvious meaning. Those who are free to come
and go versus those who have to stay locked up, for instance.
She may have been saying that she preferred to be among the
free.” .

“Or she may just have wanted to please her keeper,” interjects
President Garrard. “By saying that they looked alike.”

“A bit Machiavellian for an animal, don’t you think?” says a
large blond man whose name he did not catch. ;

“Machiavelli the fox, his contemporaries called him,” says his
mother.

“But that’s a different matter entirely—the fabulous qualities
of animals,” objects the large man.

“Yes,” says his mother.

It is all going smoothly enough. They have been served pump-
kin soup and no oné is complaining. Can he afford to relax?

He was right about the fish. For the entree the choice is be-
tween red snapper with baby potatoes and fettucine with roasted
eggplant. Garrard orders the fettucine, as he does; in fact, among
the eleven of them there are only three fish orders.

“Interesting how often religious communities choose to define
themselves in terms of dietary prohibitions,” observes Garrard.

“Yes,” says his mother.

“T mean, it is interesting that the form of the definition should
be, for instance, ‘We are the people who don’t eat snakes’ rather
than ‘We are the péople who eat lizards.’ What we don’t do
rather than what we do do.” Before his move into administration,
Garrard was a political scientist.

39


--- Page 15 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

“Tt all has to do with cleanness and uncleanness,” says Wun-
derlich, who despite his name is British. “Clean and unclean ani-
mals, clean and unclean habits. Uncleanness can be a very handy
device for deciding who belongs and who doesn’t, who is in and
who is out.”

“Uncleanness and shame,” he himself interjects. “Animals have
no shame.” Fle is surprised to hear himself speaking. But why
not?—the evening is going well.

“Exactly,” says Wunderlich. “Animals don’t hide their excre-
tions, they perform sex in the open. They have no sense of shame,
we say: that is what makes them different from us. But the basic
idea remains uncleanness. Animals have unclean habits, so they
are excluded. Shame makes human beings of us, shame of un-
cleanness. Adam and Eve: the founding myth. Before that we
were all just animals together.”

He has never heard Wunderlich before. He likes him, likes his
earnest, stuttering, Oxford manner. A relief from American self-
confidence.

“But that can’t be how the mechanism works,” objects Olivia
Garrard, the president's elegant wife. “It’s too abstract, too much
of a bloodless idea. Animals are creatures we don’t have sex
with—that’s how we distinguish them from ourselves. The very
thought of sex with them makes us shudder. That is the level at
which they are unclean—all of them. We don’t mix with them.
We keep the clean apart from the unclean.”

“But we eat them.” ‘The voice is Norma’s. “We do mix with
them. We ingest them. We turn their flesh into ours. So it can’t
be how the mechanism works. There are specific kinds of animal
that we don’t eat. Surely those are the unclean ones, not animals in
general.”

_ She is right, of course. But wrong: a mistake to bring the
conversation back to the matter on the table before them, the
‘ood,

Wanderlich speaks again. “The Greeks had a feeling there was
something wrong in slaughter, but thought they could make up
for that by ritualizing it. They made a sacrificial offering, gave a

40

J. M. COETZEE

percentage to the gods, hoping thereby to keep the rest. The
same notion as the tithe. Ask for the blessing of the gods on the
flesh you are about to eat, ask them to declare it clean.”

“Perhaps that is the origin of the gods,” says his mother. A
silence falls. “Perhaps we invented gods so that we could put the
blame on them. They gave us permission to eat flesh. They gave
us permission to play with unclean things. It’s not our fault, it’s
theirs. We’re just their children.”!*

“Is that what you believe?” asks Mrs. Garrard cautiously.

“And God said: Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat
for you,” his mother quotes. “It’s convenient. God told us it was
OK”

Silence again. They are waiting for her to go on. She is, after
all, the paid entertainer.

“Norma is right,” says his mother. “The problem is to define
our difference from animals in general, not just from so-called
unclean animals. The ban on certain animals—pigs and so
forth—is quite arbitrary. It is simply a signal that we are in a
danger area. A minefield, in fact. The minefield of dietary pro-
scriptions. There is no logic to a taboo, nor is there any logic to
a minefield—there-is not meant to be. You can never guess what
you may eat or where you may step unless you are in possession
of a map, a divine map.”

“But that’s just anthropology,” objects Norma from the foot of
the table. “It says nothing about our behavior today. People in the
modern world no longer decide their diet on the basis of whether

they have divine permission. If we eat pig and don’t eat dog, that’s
just the way we are ‘brought up. Wouldn’t you agree, Elizabeth?
It’s just one of our folkways.”

4James Serpell, quoting Walter Burkert, Horo necans, describes the ritual of
animal sacrifice in the ancient world as “an elaborate exercise in blame-shifting.”
The animal delivered to the temple was by various means made to seem to assent to
its death, while the priests took precautions to cleanse themselves of guilt. “It was
ultimately the gods who were to blame, since it was they who demanded the sac-
rifice.” In Greece the Pythagoreans and Orphics condemned these sacrifices “pre-
cisely because the underlying carnivorous motives were so obvious.” In the Company
of Animals (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), 167-68.

41


--- Page 16 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

Elizabeth. She is claiming intimacy. But what game is she play-
ing? Is there a trap she is leading his mother into?

“There is disgust,” says his mother. “We may have got rid of
the gods but we have not got rid of disgust, which is a version of
religious horror.”

“Disgust is not universal,” objects Norma. “The French eat
frogs. The Chinese eat anything. There is no disgust in China.”

His mother is silent.

“So perhaps it’s just a matter of what you learned at home, of
what your mother told you was OK to eat and what was not.”

“What was clean to eat and what was not,” his mother
murmurs.

“And maybe”—now Norma is going too far, he thinks, now she
is beginning to dominate the conversation to an extent that is
totally inappropriate—“the whole notion of cleanness versus un-
cleanness has a completely different function, namely, to enable
certain groups to self-define themselves, negatively, as elite, as
elected. We are the people who abstain from a or b or c, and by
that power of abstinence we mark ourselves off as superior: as a
superior caste within society, for instance. Like the Brahmins.”

There is a silence.

“The ban on meat that you get in vegetarianism is only an ex-
treme form of dietary ban,” Norma presses on; “and a dietary ban
is a quick, simple way for an elite group to define itself. Other
people’s table habits are unclean, we can’t eat or drink with
them.”

Now she is getting really close to the bone. There is a certain
amount of shuffling, there is unease in the air. Fortunately the
course is over—the red snapper, the tagliatelle—and the wait-
resses are among them removing the plates.

“Have you read Gandhi’s autobiography, Norma?” asks his
mother.

“No.”

“Gandhi was sent off to England as a young man to study law.
England, of course, prided itself as a great meat-eating country.

42

J. M. COBTZEE

But his mother made him promise not to eat meat. She packed a
trunk full of food for him to take along. During the sea voyage he
scavenged a little bread from the ship’s table and for the rest ate
out of his trunk. In London he faced a long search for lodgings
and eating-houses that served his kind of food. Social relations
with the English were difficult because he could not accept or
return hospitality. It wasn’t until he fell in with certain fringe
elements of English society—Fabians, theosophists, and so
forth—that he began to feel at home. Until then he was just a
lonely little law student.”

“What is the point, Elizabeth?” says Norma. “What is the
point of the story?”

“Just that Gandhi’s vegetarianism can hardly be conceived as
the exercise of power. It condemned him to the margins of soci-
ety. It was his particular genius to incorporate what he found on
those margins into his political philosophy.”

“Tn any event,” interjects the blond man, “Gandhi is not a good
example. His vegetarianism was hardly committed. He was a veg-
etarian because of the promise he made to his mother. He may
have kept his promise, but he regretted and-resented it.”

“Don’t you think that mothers can have a good influence on
their children?” says Elizabeth Costello.

There is a moment’s silence. It is time for him, the good son,
to speak. He does not.

“But your own vegetarianism, Mrs. Costello,” says President
Garrard, pouring oil on troubled waters: “it comes out of moral
conviction, does it not?”

“No, I don’t think so,” says his mother. “It comes out of a
desire to save my soul.”

Now there truly is a silence, broken only by the clink of plates
as the waitresses set baked Alaskas before them.

“Well, I have a great respect for it,” says Garrard. “As a way of
life.”

“Pm wearing leather shoes,” says his mother. “I’m carrying a
leather purse. I wouldn’t have overmuch respect if I were you.”

