43


--- Page 17 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

“Consistency,” murmurs Garrard. “Consistency is the hob-
goblin of small minds. Surely one can draw a distinction between
eating meat and wearing leather.”

“Degrees of obscenity,” she replies.

“I too have the greatest respect for codes based on respect for
life,” says Dean Arendt, entering the debate for the first time. “I
am prepared to accept that dietary taboos do not have to be mere
customs. I will accept that underlying.them are genuine moral
concerns. But at the same time one must say that our whole su-
perstructure of concern and belief is a closed book to animals
themselves. You can’t explain to a steer that its life is going to be
spared, any more than you can explain to a bug that you are not
going to step on it. In the lives of animals, things, good or bad,
just happen. So vegetarianism is a very odd transaction, when you
come to think of it, with the beneficiaries unaware that they are
being benefited. And with no hope of ever becoming aware. Be-
cause they live in a vacuum of consciousness.” :

Arendt pauses. It is his mother’s turn to speak, but she merely
looks confused, gray and tired and confused. He leans across. “It’s
been a long day, mother,” he says. “Perhaps it is time.”

“Yes, it is time,” she says.

“You won't have coffee?” inquires President Garrard.

“No, it will just keep me awake.” She turns to Arendt. “That is
a good point you raise. No consciousness that we would recog-
nize as consciousness. No awareness, as far as we can make out, of
a self with a history. What I mind is what tends to come next.
They have no consciousness therefore. Therefore what? There-
fore we are free to use them for our own ends? ‘Therefore we
are free to kill them? Why? What is so special about the form
of consciousness we recognize that makes killing a bearer of it
a crime while killing an animal goes unpunished? There are
moments—”

“To say nothing of babies,” interjects Wunderlich. Everyone
turns and looks at him. “Babies have no self-consciousness, yet we
think it a more heinous crime to kill a baby than an adult.”

“Therefore?” says Arendt.

44

j. M. COETZEE

“Therefore all this discussion of consciousness and whether
animals have it is just a smoke screen. At bottom we protect our
own kind. Thumbs up to human babies, thumbs down to veal
calves. Don’t you think so, Mrs. Costello?”

“T don’t know what I think,” says Elizabeth Costello. “I often
wonder what thinking is, what understanding is. Do we really
understand the universe better than animals do? Understanding
a thing often looks to me like playing with one of those Rubik
cubes. Once you have made all the little bricks snap into place,
hey presto, you understand. It makes sense if you live inside a

Rubik cube, but if you don’t...”
There is a silence. “I would have thought—” says Norma; but
at this point he gets to his feet, and to his relief Norma stops.
‘The president rises, and then everyone else. “A wonderful lec-
ture, Mrs. Costello,” says the president. “Much food for thought.
We look forward to tomorrow’s offering.”

“y

45


--- Page 18 ---
The Poets and the Animals

L. 1 AFTER ELEVEN. His mother has retired for the night, he and
Norma are downstairs clearing up the children’s mess. After that
he still has a class to prepare.

“Are you going to her seminar tomorrow?” asks Norma.

“Pll have to.”

“What is it on?” .

“The Poets and the Animals.’ That’s the title. The English
Department is staging it. They are holding it in a seminar room,
so I don’t think they are expecting a big audience.”

“I’m glad it’s on something she knows about. I find her philos-
ophizing rather difficult to take.”

“Oh. What do-you have in mind?”

“For instance what she was saying about human reason. Pre-
sumably she was trying to make a point about the nature of ra-
tional understanding. To say that rational accounts are merely a
consequence of the. structure of the human mind; that animals
have their own accounts in accordance with the structure of their
own minds, to which we don’t have access because we don’t share
a language with them.”

“And what’s wrong with that?”

“It’s naive, John. It’s the kind of easy, shallow relativism that
impresses freshmen. Respect for everyone’s worldview, the cow’s
worldview, the squirrel’s worldview, and so forth. In the end it
leads to total intellectual paralysis. You spend so much time re-
specting that you haven’t time left to think.”

“Doesn’t a squirrel have a worldview?”

47


--- Page 19 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

“Yes, a squirrel does have a worldview. Its worldview comprises
acorns and trees and weather and cats and dogs and automobiles
and squirrels of the opposite sex. It comprises an account of how
these phenomena interact and how it should interact with them to
survive. That’s all. There’s no more. That's the world according
to squirrel.”

“We are sure about that?”

“We are sure about it in the sense that hundreds of years of
observing squirrels has not led us to conclude otherwise. If there
is anything else in the squirrel mind, it does not issue in observ-
able behavior. For all practical purposes, the mind of the squirrel
is a very simple mechanism.”

“So Descartes was right, animals are just biological automata.”

“Broadly speaking, yes. You cannot, in the abstract, distinguish
between an animal mind and a machine simulating an animal
mind.”

“And human beings are different?”

“John, I am tired and you are being irritating. Human beings
invent mathematics, they build telescopes, they do calculations,
they construct machines, they press a button, and, bang, Sojourner
lands on Mars, exactly as predicted. That is why rationality is not
just, as your mother claims, a game. Reason provides us with real
knowledge of the real world. It has been tested, and it works, You
are a physicist. You ought to know.”

“I agree. It works. Still, isn’t there a position outside from
which our doing our thinking and then sending out a Mars probe
looks a lot like a squirrel doing its thinking and then dashing out
and snatching a nut? Isn’t that perhaps what she meant?”

“But there isn’t any such position! I know it sounds old-
fashioned, but I have to say it. There is no position outside of
reason where you can stand and lecture about reason and pass
judgment on reason.”

“Except the position of someone who has withdrawn from
reason.”

“That's just French irrationalism, the sort of thing a person
would say who has never set foot inside a mental institution

48

J. M. COETZEE

and seen what people look like who have really withdrawn from
reason.”
“Then except for God.”
“Not if God is a God of reason. A God of reason cannot stand
outside reason.” ;
“P’m surprised, Norma. You are talking like an old-fashioned
rationalist.” :
“You misunderstand me. That is the ground your mother has
chosen. Those are her terms. J am merely responding.”
“Who was the missing guest?”
“You mean the empty seat? It was Stern, the poet.”
“Do you think it was a protest?”
“Pm sure it was. She should have thought twice before bring-
ing up the Holocaust. I could feel hackles rising all around me in
the audience.” ; ;
The empty seat was indeed a protest. When he goes in for his
morning class, there is a letter in his box addressed to his mother.
He hands it over to her when he comes home to fetch her. She
reads it quickly, then with a sigh passes it over to him. “Who is
this man?” she says. : :
“Abraham Stern. A poet. Quite well-respected, I believe. He
has been here donkey’s years.” ;
He reads Stern’s note, which is handwritten.

Dear Mrs. Costello,

Excuse me for not attending last night’s dinner. I have read your
books and know you are a serious person, so I do you the credit of
taking what you sajd in your lecture seriously. ;

At the kernel of your lecture, it seemed to me, was the question
of breaking bread. If we refuse to break bread with the execution-
ers of Auschwitz, can we continue to break bread with the slaugh-
terers of animals? ;

You took over for your own purposes the familiar comparison
between the murdered Jews of Europe and slaughtered cattle. The
Jews died like cattle, therefore cattle die like Jews, you say. That is

a trick with words which I will not accept. You misunderstand the

49



--- Page 20 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

nature of likenesses; I would even say you misunderstand willfully,
to the point of blasphemy. Man is made in the likeness of God but
God does not have the likeness of man. If Jews were treated like
cattle, it does not follow that cattle are treated like Jews. The in-
version insults the memory of the dead. It also trades on the hor-
rors of the camps in a cheap way.

Forgive me if l am forthright. You said you were old enough not
to have time to waste on niceties, and I am an old man too.

Yours sincerely,

Abraham Stern.

He delivers his mother to her hosts in the English Department,
then goes to a meeting. The meeting drags on and on. It is two-
thirty before he can get to the seminar room in Stubbs Hall,

She is speaking as he enters. He sits down as quietly as he can
near the door.

“In that kind of poetry,” she is saying, “animals stand for
human qualities: the lion for courage, the owl for wisdom, and so
forth. Even in Rilke’s poem the panther is there as a stand-in for
something else. He dissolves into a dance of energy around a cen-
ter, an image that comes from physics, elementary particle phys-
ics. Rilke does not get beyond this point—beyond the panther as
the vital embodiment of the kind of force that is released in an
atomic explosion but is here trapped not so much by the bars of
the cage as by what the bars compel on the panther: a concentric
lope that leaves the will stupefied, narcotized.”

Rilke’s panther? What panther? His confusion must show: the
girl next to him pushes a photocopied sheet under his nose. Three
poems: one by Rilke called “The Panther,” two by Ted Hughes
called “The Jaguar” and “Second Glance at a Jaguar.” He has no
time to read them.

“Hughes is writing against Rilke,” his mother goes on. “Ee
uses the same staging in the zoo, but it is the crowd for a change
that stands mesmerized, and among them the man, the poet, en-
tranced and horrified and overwhelmed, his powers of under-

30

j. M. COETZEE

standing pushed beyond their limit. The jaguar’s vision, unlike
the panther’s, is not blunted. On the contrary, his eyes drill
through the darkness of space. The cage has no reality to him, he
is elsewhere. He is elsewhere because his consciousness is kinetic
rather than abstract: the thrust of his muscles moves him through
a space quite different in nature from the three-dimensional box
of Newton—a circular space that returns upon itself.

“So—leaving aside the ethics of caging large animals—Hughes
is feeling his way toward a different kind of being-in-the-world,
one which is not entirely foreign to us, since the experience be-
fore the cage seems to belong to dream-experience, experience
held in the collective unconscious. In these poems we know the
jaguar not from the way he seems but from the way he moves.
The body is as the body moves, or as the currents of life move
within it. The poéms ask us to imagine our way into that way of
moving, to inhabit that body.

“With Hughes it is a matter—I emphasize—not of inhabiting
another mind but of inhabiting another body. That is the kind of
poetry I bring to your attention today: poetry that does not try to
find an idea in the animal, that is not about the animal, but is
instead the record of an engagement with him.

“What is peculiar about poetic engagements of this kind is that,
no matter with what intensity they take place, they remain a mat-
ter of complete indifference to their objects. In this respect they
are different from love poems, where your intention is to move
your object.

“Not that animals do not care what we feel about them. But
when we divert the current of feeling that flows between ourself
and the animal into words, we abstract it forever from the animal.
Thus the poem is not a gift to its object, as the love poem is. It
falls within an entirely human economy in which the animal has
no share. Does that answer your question?”

Someone else has his hand up: a tall young man with glasses.
He doesn’t know Ted Hughes’s poetry well, he says, but the last
he heard, Hughes was:running a sheep ranch somewhere in

vd


--- Page 21 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

England. Either he is just raising sheep as poetic subjects (there is
a titter around the room) or he is a real rancher raising sheep for
the market. “How does this square with what you were saying in
your lecture yesterday, when you seemed to be pretty much
against killing animals for meat?”

“Pve never met Ted Hughes,” replies his mother, “so I can’t
tell you what kind of farmer he is. But Jet me try to answer your
question on another level.

“I have no reason to think that Hughes believes his attentive-
ness to animals is unique. On the contrary, I suspect he believes
he is recovering an attentiveness that our faraway ancestors pos-
sessed and we have lost (he conceives of this loss in evolutionary
rather than historical terms, but that is another question). I would
guess that he believes he looks at animals much as paleolithic
hunters used to.

“This puts Hughes in a line of poets who celebrate the primi-
tive and repudiate the Western bias toward abstract thought. The
line of Blake and Lawrence, of Gary Snyder in the United States,
or Robinson Jeffers. Hemingway too, in his hunting and bull-
fighting phase.

“Bullfighting, it seems to me, gives us a clue. Kill the beast by
all means, they say, but make it a contest, a ritual, and honor your
antagonist for his strength and bravery. Eat him too, after you
have vanquished him, in order for his strength and courage to
enter you. Look him in the eyes before you kill him, and thank
him afterwards. Sing songs about him.

“We can call this primitivism. It is an attitude that is easy to
criticize, to mock. It is deeply masculine, masculinist. Its ramifi-
cations into politics are to be mistrusted. But when all is said and
done, there remains something attractive about it at an ethical
level.

“It is also impractical, however. You do not feed four billion
people through the efforts of matadors or deer-hunters armed
with bows and arrows. We have become too many. There is no
time to respect and honor all the animals we need to feed our-

52

Jj. M. COETZEE

selves. We need factories of death; we need factory animals. Chi-
cago showed us the way; it was from the Chicago stockyards that
the Nazis learned how to process bodies.

“But let me get back to Hughes. You say: Despite the primitiv-
ist trappings Hughes is a butcher, and what am I doing in his
company?

“T would reply, writers teach us more than they are aware of.
By bodying forth the jaguar, Hughes shows us that we too can
embody animals—by the process called poetic invention that
mingles breath and sense in a way that no one has explained and
no one ever will. He shows us how to bring the living body into
being within ourselves. When we read the jaguar poem, when we
recollect it afterwards in tranquillity, we are for a brief while the
jaguar. He ripples within us, he takes over our body, he is us.

“So far, so good. With what I have said thus far I don’t think
Hughes himself would disagree. It is much like the mixture of
shamanism and spirit possession and archetype psychology that
he himself espouses. In other words, a primitive experience
(being face to face with an animal), a primitivist poem, and a
primitivist theory of poetry to justify it.

“It is also the kind of-poetry with which hunters and the people
I call ecology-managers can feel comfortable. When Hughes the
poet stands before the jaguar cage, he looks at an individual jaguar
and is possessed by that individual jaguar life. It has to be that
way. Jaguars in general, the subspecies jaguar, the idea of a jaguar,
will fail to move him because we cannot experience abstractions.
Nevertheless, the poem that Hughes writes is about the jaguar,
about jaguarness embodied in this jaguar. Just as later on, when
he writes his marvelous poems about salmon, they are about
salmon as transitory occupants of the salmon-life, the salmon-
biography. So despite the vividness and earthiness of the poetry,
there remains something Platonic about it.

“In the ecological vision, the salmon and the river-weeds and
the water-insects interact in a great, complex dance with the earth
and the weather. The whole is greater than the sum of the parts.

53


--- Page 22 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

In the dance, each organism has a role: it is these multiple roles,
rather than the particular beings who play them, that participate
in the dance. As for actual role-players, as long as they are self-
renewing, as long as they keep coming forward, we need pay them
no heed.

“I called this Platonic and I do so again. Our eye is on the
creature itself, but our mind is on the system of interactions of
which it is the earthly, material embodiment.

“The irony is a terrible one. An ecological philosophy that tells
us to live side by side with other creatures justifies itself by ap-
pealing to an idea, an idea of a higher order than any living crea-
ture. An idea, finally—and this is the crushing twist to the irony—
which no creature except Man is capable of comprehending.
Every living creature fights for its own, individual life, refuses, by
fighting, to accede to the idea that the salmon or the gnat is of a
lower order of importance than the idea of the salmon or the idea
of the gnat. But when we see the salmon fighting for its life, we
say, it is just programmed to fight; we say, with Aquinas, it is
locked into natural slavery; we say, it lacks self-consciousness.

“Animals are not believers in ecology. Even the ethnobiolo-
gists do not make that claim. Even the ethnobiologists do not say
that the ant sacrifices its life to perpetuate the species. What they
say is subtly different: the ant dies and the function of its death is
the perpetuation of the species. The species-life is a force which
acts through the individual but which the individual is incapable
of understanding. In that sense the idea is innate, and the ant is
run by the idea as a computer is run by a program.

“We, the managers of the ecology—I’m sorry to go on like
this, I am getting way beyond your question, I'll be through in a
moment—we managers understand the greater dance, therefore
we can decide how many trout may be fished or how many jaguar
may be trapped before the stability of the dance is upset. The only
organism over which we do not claim this power of life and death
is Man. Why? Because Man is different. Man understands the
dance as the other dancers do not. Man is an intellectual being.”

J4

J. M. COETZEE

While she speaks, his mind has been wandering. He has heard
it before, this antiecologism of hers. Jaguar poems are all very
well, he thinks, but you won’t get a bunch of Australians standing
around a sheep, listening to its silly baa, writing poems about it.
Isn’t that what is so suspect in the whole animals-rights business:
that it has to ride on the back of pensive gorillas and sexy jaguars
and huggable pandas because the real objects of its concern,
chickens and pigs, to say nothing of white rats or prawns, are not
newsworthy?

Now Elaine Marx, who did the introduction to yesterday’s lec-
ture, asks a question. “In your lecture you argued that various
criteria—Does this creature have reason? Does this creature have
speech?>—have been used in bad faith to justify distinctions that
have no real basis, between Homo and other primates, for exam-
ple, and thus to justify exploitation.

“Yet the very fact’ that you can be arguing against this reason-
ing, exposing its falsity, means that you put a certain faith in the
power of reason, of true reason as opposed to false reason.

“Let me concretize my question by referring to the case of
Lemuel Gulliver. In:Gulliver’s Travels Swift gives us a vision of a
utopia of reason, the land of the so-called Houyhnhnms, but it
turns out to be a place where there is no home for Gulliver, who
is the closest that Swift comes to a representation of us, his read-
ers. But which of us would want to live in Houyhnhnm-land, with
its rational vegetarianism and its rational government and its ra-
tional approach to love, marriage, and death? Would even a horse
want to live in such a perfectly regulated, totalitarian society?
More pertinently for us, what is the track record of totally regu-
lated societies? Is it not a fact that they either collapse or else turn
militaristic?

“Specifically, my question is: Are you not expecting too much
of humankind when you ask us to live without species exploita-
tion, without cruelty? Is it not more human to accept our own
humanity—even if it means embracing the carnivorous Yahoo
within ourselves—than to end up like Gulliver, pining for a state

JS


--- Page 23 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

he can never attain, and for good reason: it is not in his nature,
which is a human nature?’

“An interesting question,” his mother replies. “I find Swift an
intriguing writer. For instance, his ‘Modest Proposal.’ Whenever
there is overwhelming agreement about how to read a book, I
prick up my ears. On ‘A Modest Proposal’ the consensus is that
Swift does not mean what he says, or seems to say. He says, or
seems to say, that Irish families could make a living by raising
babies for the table of their English masters. But he can’t mean
that, we say, because we all know that it is atrocious to kill and eat
human babies. Yet, come to think of it, we go on, the English are
already in a sense killing human babies, by letting them starve.
So, come to think of it, the English are already atrocious.

“That is the orthodox reading, more or less. But why, I ask
myself, the vehemence with which itis stuffed down the throats of
young readers? Thus shall you read Swift, their teachers say, thus
and in no other way. If it is atrocious to kill and eat human babies,
why is it not atrocious to kill and eat piglets? If you want Swift to
be a dark ironist rather than a facile pamphleteer, you might ex-
amine the premises that make his fable so easy to digest.

“Let me now turn to Gulliver’s Travels.

“On the one hand you have the Yahoos, who are associated
with raw meat, the smell of excrement, and what we used to call
bestiality. On the other you have the Houyhnhnms, who are asso-
ciated with grass, sweet smells, and the rational ordering of the
passions. In between you have Gulliver, who wants to be a Hou-
yhnhnm but knows secretly that he is a Yahoo. All of that is per-
fectly clear. As with ‘A Modest Proposal,’ the question is, what do
we make of it?

“One observation. The horses expel Gulliver. Their ostensible
reason is that he does not meet the standard of rationality. The
real reason is that he does not look like a horse, but something
else: a dressed-up Yahoo, in fact. So: the standard of reason that
has been applied by carnivorous bipeds to justify a special status
for themselves can equally be applied by herbivorous quadrupeds.

“The standard of reason. Gulliver’s Travels seems to me to op-

56

J. M. COETZEE

erate within the three-part Aristotelian division of gods, beasts,
and men. As long as one tries to fit the three actors into just two
categories—which are the beasts, which are the men?—one can’t
make sense of the fable. Nor can the Houyhnhnms. The Hou-
yhnhnms are gods of a kind, cold, Apollonian. The test they apply
to Gulliver is: Is he a god or a beast? They feel it is the appropri-
ate test. We, instinctively, don’t.

“What has always puzzled me about Gulliver’s Travels—and
this is a perspective you might expect from an ex-colonial—is that
Gulliver always t travels alone. Gulliver goes on voyages of explo-
ration to unknown lands, but he does not come ashore with an
armed party, as happened in reality, and Swift’s book says nothing
about what would normally have come after Gulliver’s pioneer-
ing efforts: follow-up expeditions, expeditions to colonize Lilli-
put or the island of the Houyhnhnms.

“The question I ask is: What if Gulliver and an armed expe-
dition were to land, shoot a few Yahoos when they become
threatening, and then shoot and eat a horse, for food? What
would that do t6 Swift’s somewhat too neat, somewhat too dis-
embodied, somewhat too unhistorical fable? It would certainly
give the Houyhnhnms a rude shock, making it clear that there is
a third category besides gods and beasts, namely, man, of whom
their ex-client Gulliver is one; furthermore, that if the horses
stand for reason, then man stands for physical force.

“Taking over an island and slaughtering its inhabitants is, by
the way, what Odysseus and his men did on Thrinacia, the island
sacred to Apollo, an act for which they were mercilessly punished
by the god. And that story, in turn, seems to call on older layers
of belief, from a'time when bulls were gods and killing and eating
a god could call down a curse on you.

“So—excuse the confusion of this response—yes, we are not
horses, we do not have their clear, rational, naked beauty; on the
contrary, we are subequine primates, otherwise known as man.
You say there is nothing to do but embrace that status, that na-
ture. Very well, let us do so. But let us also push Swift’s fable to
its limits and recognize that, in history, embracing the status of

57



--- Page 24 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

man has entailed slaughtering and enslaving a race of divine or
else divinely created beings and bringing down on ourselves a
curse thereby.”

Tr 1s three-fifteen, a couple of hours before his mother’s last en-
gagement. He walks her over to his office along tree-lined paths
where the Jast autumn leaves are falling.

“Do you really believe, Mother, that poetry classes are going to
close down the slaughterhouses?”

“No.”

“Then why do it? You said you were tired of clever tall about
animals, proving by syllogism that they do or do not have souls.
But isn’t poetry just another kind of clever talk: admiring the
muscles of the big cats in verse? Wasn’t your point about talk that
it changes nothing? It seems to me the level of behavior you want
to change is too elementary, too elemental, to be reached by talk.
Carnivorousness expresses something truly deep about human
beings, just as it does about jaguars. You wouldn’t want to put a
jaguar on a soybean diet.”

“Because he would die. Human beings don’t die on a vegetar-
ian diet.”

“No, they don’t. But they don’t want a vegetarian diet. They
like eating meat. There is something atavistically satisfying about
it. That’s the brutal truth. Just as it’s a brutal truth that, in a sense,
animals deserve what they get. Why waste your time trying to
help them when they won’t help themselves? Let them stew in
their own juice. If I were asked what the general attitude is toward
the animals we eat, I would say: contempt. We treat them badly
because we despise them; we despise them because they don’t
fight back.”

“T don’t disagree,” says his mother. “People complain that we
treat animals like objects, but in fact we treat them like prisoners
of war. Do you know that when zoos were first opened to the
public, the keepers had to protect the animals against attacks by
spectators? The spectators felt the animals were there to be in-

58

J. M. COETZEE

sulted and abused, like prisoners in a triumph. We had a war once
against the animals, which we called hunting, though in fact war
and hunting are the same thing (Aristotle saw it clearly).! That
war went on for millions of years. We won it definitively only a
few hundred years ago, when we invented guns. It is only since
victory became absolute that we have been able to afford to culti-
vate compassion. But our compassion is very thinly spread. Be-
neath it is amore primitive attitude. The prisoner of war does
not belong to our tribe. We can do what we want with him. We
can sacrifice him to our gods. We can cut his throat, tear out his
heart, throw him on the fire. There are no laws when it comes to
prisoners of war.”

“And that is what you want to cure humankind of?”

“John, I don’t know what I want to do. I just don’t want to sit
silent.”

“Very well. But generally one doesn’t kill prisoners of war.
One turns them into’slaves.”

“Well, that’s what our captive herds are: slave populations.
‘Their work is to breed for us. Even their sex becomes a form of
labor. We don’t hate them because they are not worth hating any
more. We regard them, as you say, with contempt.

“ETowever, there are still animals we hate. Rats, for instance.
Rats haven’t surrendered. They fight back. They form themselves
into underground units in our sewers. They aren’t winning, but
they aren’t losing either. To say nothing of the insects and the
microbia. They may beat us yet. They will certainly outlast us.”

Tue final session of his mother’s visit is to take the form of a
debate. Her opponent will be the large, blond man from yester-
day evening’s dinner, who turns out to be Thomas O’Hearne,
professor of philosophy at Appleton.

1 Aristotle: “The art of war is a natural art of acquisition, for the art of acquisition
includes hunting, an art which we ought to practise against wild beasts, and against
men who, though intended by nature to be governed, will not submit; for war of. such
a kind is naturally just.” Politics 1.8, in Regan and Singer, Animal Rights, 110.

59



--- Page 25 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

It has been agreed that O’Hearne will have three opportunities
to present positions, and his mother three opportunities to reply.
Since O’Hearne has had the courtesy to send her a précis before-
hand, she knows, broadly speaking, what he will be saying.

“My first reservation about the animal-rights movement,”
O’Hearne begins, “is that by failing to recognize its historical
nature, it runs the risk of becoming, like the human-rights move-
ment, yet another Western crusade against the practices of the
rest of the world, claiming universality for what are simply its
own standards.” He proceeds to give a brief outline of the rise of
animal-protection societies in Britain and America in the nine-
teenth century.

“When it comes to human rights,” he continues, “other cul-
tures and other religious traditions quite properly reply that they
have their own norms and see no reason why they should have to
adopt those of the West. Similarly, they say, they have their own
norms for the treatment of animals and see no reason to adopt
ours—particularly when ours are of such recent invention.

“In yesterday’s presentation our lecturer was very hard on Des-
cartes. But Descartes did not invent the idea that animals belong
to a different order from humankind: he merely formalized it in
a new way. The notion that we have an obligation to animals
themselves to treat them compassionately—as opposed to an ob-
ligation to ourselves to do so—is very recent, very Western, and
even very Anglo-Saxon. As long as we insist that we have access to
an ethical universal to which other traditions are blind, and try to
impose it on them by means of propaganda or even economic
pressure, we are going to meet with resistance, and that resistance
will be justified.”

It is his mother’s turn.

“The concerns you express are substantial, Professor
O’Hearne, and J am not sure I can give them a substantial an-
swer. You are correct, of course, about the history. Kindness to
animals has become a social norm only recently, in the last hun-
dred and fifty or two hundred years, and in only part of the world.

60

J. M. COETZEE

You are correct too to link this history to the history of human
rights, since concern for animals is, historically speaking, an off-
shoot of broader philanthropic concerns—for the lot of slaves
and of children, among others.’

“However, kindness to animals—and here I use ‘the word kind-
ness in. its full sense,.as an acceptance that we are all of one kind,
one nature—has been more widespread than you imply. Pet keep-
ing, for instance, is by no means a Western fad: the first travelers
to South America encountered settlements where human beings
and animals lived higgledy-piggledy together. And of course chil-
dren all over the world consort quite naturally with animals. They
don’t see any dividing line. That is something they have to be
taught, just as they have to be taught it is all right to kill and eat
them.

“Getting back to Descartes, I would only want to say that the
discontinuity he saw between animals and human beings was the
result of incomplete information. The science of Descartes’s day
had no acquaintance with the great apes or with higher marine
mammals, and thus little cause to question the assumption that
animals cannot think. And of course it had no access to the fossil
record that would reveal a graded continuum of anthropoid crea-
tures stretching from the higher primates to Homo sapiens—
anthropoids, one must point out, who were exterminated by man
in the course of his rise to power.’

“While I concede your main point about Western cultural ar-
rogance, I do think it is appropriate that those who pioneered the
industrialization of animal lives and the commodification of ani-
mal flesh should be at the forefront of trying to atone for it.”

O’Hearne presents his second thesis. “In my reading of the
scientific literature,” he says, “efforts to show that animals can

? See James Turner, Reckoning with the Beast (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 1980), chap. 1.

3 See Mary Midgley, “Persons and Non-Persons,” in In Defence of Animals, ed.
Peter Singer (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985), 59; Rosemary Rodd, Biology, Ethics, and Ani-
mals (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990), 37.

61



--- Page 26 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

think strategically, hold general concepts, or communicate sym-
bolically, have had very limited success. The best performance
the higher apes can put up is no better than that of a speech-
impaired human being with severe mental retardation. If so, are
not animals, even the higher animals, properly thought of as be-
longing to another legal and ethical realm entirely, rather than
being placed in this depressing human subcategory? Isn’t there a
certain wisdom in the traditional view that says that animals can-
not enjoy legal rights because they are not persons, even potential
persons, as fetuses are? In working out rules for our dealings with
animals, does it not make more sense for such rules to apply to us
and to our treatment of them, as at present, rather than being
predicated upon rights which animals cannot claim or enforce or
even understand?”*

His mother’s turn. “Yo respond adequately, Professor
O’Hearne, would take more time than I have, since I would first
want to interrogate the whole question of rights and how we
come to possess them. So let me just make one observation: that
the program of scientific experimentation that leads you to con-
clude that animals are imbeciles is profoundly anthropocentric. It
values being able to find your way out of a sterile maze, ignoring
the fact that if the researcher who designed the maze were to be
parachuted into the jungles of Borneo, he or she would be dead of
starvation in a week. In fact I would go further. If I as a human
being were told that the standards by which animals are being
measured in these experiments are human standards, I would be
insulted. It is the experiments themselves that are imbecile. The
behaviorists who design them claim that we understand only by a
process of creating abstract models and then testing those models
against reality. What nonsense. We understand by immersing
ourselves and our intelligence in complexity. There is something

* Cf. Bernard Williams: “Before one gets to the question of how animals should
be treated, there is the fundamental point that this is the only question there can be:
how they should be treated. The choice can only be whether animals benefit from
our practices or are harmed by them.” Quoted in Michael P. T. Leahy, Against
Liberation (London and New York: Routledge, 1991), 208.

62

J. M. COETZEE

self-stultified in the way in which scientific behaviorism recoils
from the complexity of life.’

“As for animals being too dumb and stupid to speak for them-
selves, consider the following sequence of events. .When Albert
Camus was a young boy in Algeria, his grandmother told him
to bring her one of the hens from the cage in their backyard.
He obeyed, then watched her cut off its head with a kitchen
knife, catching its blood in a bowl so that the floor would not be
dirtied.

“The death-cry of that hen imprinted itself on the boy’s mem-
ory so hauntingly that in 1958 he wrote an impassioned attack on
the guillotine. As a result, in part, of that polemic, capital punish-
ment was abolished in France. Who is to say, then, that the hen
did not speak?”® .

O’Hearne. “I make the following statement with due delibera-
tion, mindful of the historical associations it may evoke. I do not
believe that life is as important to animals as it is to us. There is
certainly in animals an instinctive struggle against death, which
they share with us. But they do not understand death as we do, or
rather, as we fail to do. There is, in the human mind, a collapse of
the imagination before death, and that collapse of the imagina-
tion—graphically evoked in yesterday’s lecture—is the basis of
our fear of death. That fear does not and cannot exist in animals,
since the effort to comprehend extinction, and the failure to do
so, the failure to master it, have simply not taken place.

“For that reason, I want to suggest, dying is, for an animal, just
something that happens, something against which there may be a
revolt of the organism but not a revolt of the soul. And the lower

> For a critique of behaviorism in the political context of its times, see Bernard E.
Rollin, The Unheeded Cry (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990), 100-103. On the
behaviorist taboo on considering the subjective mental states of animals, see Donald
R. Griffin, Animal Minds (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 6-7. Griffin
calls the taboo “a serious impediment to scientific investigation” but suggests that in
practice investigators do not adhere to it (6, 120).

6 Albert Camus, The First Man, trans. David Hapgood (London: Hamish Hamil-
ton, 1995), 181-83; “Réflexions sur la guillotine,” in Essais, ed. R. Quilliot and
L., Faucon (Paris: Gallimard, 1965), 1019-64.

63



--- Page 27 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

down the scale of evolution one goes, the truer this is. To an

insect, death is the breakdown of systems that keep the physical

organism functioning, and nothing more.

“To animals, death is continuous with life. It is only among
certain very imaginative human beings that one encounters a hor-
ror of dying so acute that they then project it onto other beings,
including animals. Animals live, and then they die: that is all.
‘Thus to equate a butcher who slaughters a chicken with an execu-
tioner who kills a human being is a grave mistake. The events are
not comparable. They are not of the same scale, they are not on
the same scale.

“That leaves us with the question of cruelty. It is licit to kill
animals, I would say, because theié lives are not as important to
them as our lives are to us; the old-fashioned way of saying this is
that animals do not have immortal souls. Gratuitous cruelty, on
the other hand, I would regard as illicit. Therefore it is quite
appropriate that we should agitate for the humane treatment of
animals, even and particularly in slaughterhouses. This has for a
long time been a goal of animal welfare organizations, and I sa-
lute them for it.

“My very last point concerns what I see as the troublingly ab-
stract nature of the concern for animals in the animal-rights
movement. I want to apologize in advance to our lecturer for the
seeming harshness of what I am about to say, but I believe it needs
to be said.

“Of the many varieties of animal-lover J see around me, let me
isolate two. On the one hand, hunters, people who value animals
at a very elementary, unreflective level; who spend hours watch-
ing them and tracking them; and who, after they have killed them,
get pleasure from the taste of their flesh. On the other hand, peo-
ple who have little contact with animals, or at least with those
species they are concerned to protect, like poultry and livestock,
yet want all animals to lead—in an economic vacuum—a utopian
life in which everyone is miraculously fed and no one preys on
anyone else.

“Of the two, which, I ask, loves animals more?

64

F. M. COETZEE

“It is because agitation for animal rights, including the right to
life, is so abstract that I find it unconvincing and, finally, idle. Its
proponents talk a great deal about our community with animals,
but how do they actually live that community? Thomas Aquinas
says that friendship between human beings and animals is im-
possible, and I tend to agree.’ You can be friends neither with a
Martian nor with a bat, for the simple reason that you have too
little in common with them. We may certainly wish for there to
be community with animals, but that is not the same thing as
living in community with them. It is just a piece of prelapsarian
wistfulness.”

His mother’s turn again, her last turn. |

“Anyone who says that life matters less to animals than it does
to us has not held in his hands an animal fighting for its life. The
whole of the being of the animal is thrown into that fight, without
reserve. When you say that the fight lacks a dimension of intellec-
tual or imaginative horror, I agree. It is not the mode of being of
animals to have an intellectual horror: their whole being is in the
living flesh. .

“If I do not convince you, that is because my words, here, lack
the power to bring home to you the wholeness, the unabstracted,
unintellectual nature, of that animal being. Thatis why I urge you
to read the poets who return the living, electric being to lan-
guage; and if the poets do not move you, [ urge you to walk, flank
to flank, beside the beast that is prodded down the chute to his
executioner.

“You say that death does not matter to an animal because the
animal does not understand death. I am reminded of one of the
academic philosophers I read in preparing for yesterday’s lecture.
It was a depressing experience. It awoke in me a quite Swiftian
response. [f this is the best that human philosophy can offer, I said
to myself, I would rather go and live among horses.

“Can we, asked this philosopher, strictly speaking, say that the
veal calf misses its mother? Does the veal calf have enough of a

7 Summa 2.65.3, quoted in Regan and Singer, Animal Rights, 120.

65



--- Page 28 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

grasp of the significance of the mother-relation, does the veal calf
have enough of a grasp of the meaning of maternal absence, does
the veal calf, finally, know enough about missing to know that the
feeling it has is the feeling of missing?*®

“A calf who has not mastered the concepts of presence and
absence, of self and other—so goes the argument—cannot,
strictly speaking, be said to miss anything. In order to, strictly
speaking, miss anything, it would first have to take a course in

philosophy. What sort of philosophy is this? Throw it out, I say. |

What good do its piddling distinctions do?

“To me, a philosopher who says that the distinction between
human and nonhuman depends on whether you have a white or
a black skin, and a philosopher who says that the distinction be-
tween human and nonhuman depends on whether or not you
know the difference between a subject and a predicate, are more
alike than they are unlike.

“Usually I am wary of exclusionary gestures. I know of one
prominent philosopher who states that he is simply not prepared
to philosophize about animals with people who eat meat. I am not
sure I would go as far as that—frankly, I have not the courage—
but I must say I would not fall over myself to meet the gentleman
whose book I just have been citing. Specifically, I would not fall
over myself to break bread with him.

“Would I be prepared to discuss ideas with him? That really is
the crucial question. Discussion is possible only when there is
common ground. When opponents are at loggerheads, we say:
‘Let them reason together, and by reasoning clarify what their
differences are, and thus inch closer. They may seem to share
nothing else, but at least they share reason.’

“On the present occasion, however, I am not sure I want to
concede that I share reason with my opponent. Not when reason

® Leahy, Against Liberation, 218. Leahy elsewhere argues against a ban on the
slaughtering of animals on the grounds that (a) it would bring about unemployment
among abattoir workers, (b) it would entail an uncomfortable adjustment to our diet,

and (c) the countryside would be less attractive without its customary flocks and
herds fattening themselves as they wait to die (214).

66

#. M. CORTZEE

is what underpins the whole long philosophical tradition to which
he belongs, stretching back to Descartes and beyond Descartes
through Aquinas and Augustine to the Stoics and Aristotle. If the
last common ground that I have with him is reason, and if reason
is what sets me apart from the veal calf, then thank you but no
thank you, I’ll talk to someone else.”

That is the note on which Dean Arendt has to bring the pro-
ceedings to a close: acrimony, hostility, bitterness. He, John Ber-
nard, is sure that is nog what Arendt or his committee wanted.
Well, they should have asked him before they invited his mother.
He could have told them.

Ir 1s past midnight, he and Norma are in bed, he is exhausted, at
six he will have to get up to drive his mother to the airport. But
Norma is in a fury and will not give up. “It’s nothing but food-
faddism, and food-faddism is always an exercise in power. I have
no patience when she arrives here and begins trying to get people,
particularly the childreri, to change their eating habits. And now
these absurd public lectures! She is trying to extend her inhibiting
power over the whole community!”

He wants to sleep, but he cannot utterly betray his mother.
“She’s perfectly sincere,” he murmurs.

“It has nothing to do with sincerity. She has no self-insight at
all. It is because she has so little insight into her motives that she
seems sincere. Mad people are sincere.”

With a sigh he enters the fray. “I don’t see any difference,” he
says, “between her revulsion from eating meat and my own revul-
sion from eating snails or locusts. I have no insight into my mo-
tives and I couldn’t care less. I just find it disgusting.”

Norma snorts. “You don’t give public lectures producing pseu-
dophilosophical arguments for not eating snails. You don’t try to
turn a private fad into a public taboo.”

“Perhaps. But why not try to see her as a preacher, a social
reformer, rather than as an eccentric trying to foist her prefer-
ences on to other people?”

67



--- Page 29 ---
THE LIVES OF ANIMALS

“You are welcome to see her as a preacher. But take a look at all

the other preachers and their crazy schemes for dividing mankind .

up into the saved and the damned. Is that the kind of company
you want your mother to keep? Elizabeth Costello and her Sec-
ond Ark, with her dogs and cats and wolves, none of whom, of
course, has ever been guilty of the sin of eating flesh, to say noth-
ing of the malaria virus and the rabies virus and the HI virus,
which she will want to save so that she can restock her Brave New
World.”

“Norma, you’re ranting.”

“I’m not ranting. I would have more respect for her if she
didn’t try to undermine me behind my back, with her stories to
the children about the poor little veal calves and what the bad
men do to them. I’m tired of having them pick at their food and
ask, ‘Mom, is this veal?’ when it’s chicken or tuna-fish. It’s noth-
ing but a power-game. Her great hero Franz Kafka played the
same game with his family. He refused to eat this, he refused to
eat that, he would rather starve, he said. Soon everyone was feel-
ing guilty about eating in front of him, and he could sit back
feeling virtuous. It’s a sick game, and I’m not having the children
play it against me.””

“A few hours and she’ll be gone, then we can return to
normal.”

“Good. Say goodbye to her from me. I’m not getting up early.”

Sven o’clock, the sun just rising, and he and his mother are on
their way to the airport.

“Tm sorry about Norma,” he says. “She has been under a lot of
strain. I don’t think she is in a position to sympathize. Perhaps
one could say the same for me. It’s been such a short visit, I

° “What [Kafka] required was a regimen of eccentric food habits that were at odds
with the ‘normal’ dinner table habits of his family. . . . Kaflca’s form of anorexia—not
to lose weight but to use food ritualistically as a form of superior statement—was a
way of bridging the gap between himself and his family, while at the same time

insisting on his uniqueness, his superiority, his sense of rejection.” Karl, Franz Kafka,
188.

68 .

J. M. COETZEE

haven’t had time to make sense of why you have become so in-
tense about the animal business.”

She watches the wipers wagging back and forth. “A better ex-
planation,” she says, “is that I have not told you why, or dare not
tell you. When I think of the words, they seem so outrageous that
they are best spoken into a pillow or into a hole in the ground,
like King Midas.” ”

“T don’t follow. What is it you can’t say?”

“It’s that I no longer know where I am. I seem to move around
perfectly easily among people, to have perfectly normal relations
with them. Is it possible, I ask myself, that all of them are partici-
pants in a crime of stupefying proportions? Am I fantasizing it
all? I must be mad! Yet every day I see the evidences. The very
people I suspect produce the evidence, exhibit it, offer it to me.
Corpses. Fragments of corpses that they have bought for money.

“Tt is as if I were to visit friends, and to make some polite re-
mark about the lamp in their living room, and they were to say,
Yes, it’s nice, isn’t it? Polish-Jewish skin it’s made of, we find
that’s best, the skins of young Polish-Jewish virgins.’ And then I
go to the bathroom and the soap-wrapper says, “Ireblinka—
100% human stearate.’ Am I dreaming, I say to myself? What
kind of house is this?

“Yet I’m not dreaming. I look into your eyes, into Norma’s,
into the children’s, and I see only kindness, human-kindness.
Calm down, I tell myself, you are making a mountain out of a
molehill. This is life. Everyone else comes to terms with it, why
can’t you? Why can’t you?”

She turns on him a tearful face. What does she want, he thinks?
Does she want me to answer her question for her?

They are not yet on the expressway. He pulls the car over,
switches off the engine, takes his mother in his arms. He inhales
the smell of cold cream, of old flesh. “There, there,” he whispers
in her ear. “There, there. It will soon be over.”

69



