--- Page 1 ---
i
'
i
i
i
i
t

Pog Rive
Coben)
Tan din: oh (Vossen

Prologue

i ioe READER: Without my swearing to it, you can believe that I
would like this book, the child of my understanding, to be the most
beautiful, the most brilliant, and the most discreet that anyone could
imagine. But I have not been able to contravene the natural order; in it,
like begets like. And so what could my barren and poorly cultivated wits
beget but the history of a child who is dry, withered, capricious, and filled
with inconstant thoughts never imagined by anyone else, which is just
what one would expect of a person begotten in a prison, where every dis-
comfort has its place and every mournful sound makes its home?! Tran-
quility, a peaceful place, the pleasant countryside, serene skies, murmuring
fountains, a calm spirit, are a great motivation for the most barren muses
to prove themselves fertile and produce offspring that fill the world with
wonder and joy. A father may have a child who is ugly and lacking in all
the graces, and the love he feels for him puts a blindfold over his eyes so
that hé does not see his defects but considers them signs of charm and in-
telligence and recounts them to his friends as if they were clever and
witty. But though I seem to be the father, I am the stepfather of Don
Quixote, and I do not wish to go along with the common custom and im-
plore you, almost with tears in my eyes, as others do, dearest reader, to for-
give or ignore the faults you may find in this my child, for you are neither
his kin nor his friend, and you have a soul in your body and a will as free
as anyone’s, and you are in your own house, where you are lord, as the
sovereign is master of his revenues, and you know the old saying: under

1. Cervantes was imprisoned in Seville in 1597 and in 1602.



--- Page 2 ---
4 Don Quixore

cover of my cloak I can kill the king. Which exempts and excuses you
from all respect and obligation, and you can say anything you desire about
this history without fear that you will be reviled for the bad things or re-
warded for the good that you might say about it.

I wanted only to offer it to you plain and bare, unadomed by a pro-
logue or the endless catalogue of sonnets, epigrams, and laudatory poems
that are usually placed at the beginning of books. For I can tell you that
although it cost me some effort to compose, none seemed greater than
creating the preface you are now reading. I picked up my pen many times,
to write it, and many times I put it down again because I did not know
what to write; and once, when I was baffled, with the paper in front of
me, my pen behind my ear, my elbow propped on the writing table, and
my cheek resting in my hand, pondering what I would say, a friehd of
mine, a man who is witty and wise, unexpectedly came in and seeing me
so perplexed asked the reason, and I hid nothing from him and said I was
thinking about the prologue I had to write for the history of Don
Quixote, and the problem was that I did not want to write it yet did not
want to bring to light the deeds of so noble a knight without one.

“For how could I not be confused at what that old legislator, the pub-
lic, will say when it sees that after all the years I have spent asleep in the
silence of obscurity, | emerge now, carrying all my years onmy back,? with
a tale as dry as esparto grass, devoid of invention, deficient in style, poor
in ideas, and lacking all erudition and doctrine, without notes in the mar-
gins or annotations at the end of the book, when I see that other books,
even if they are profane fictions, are so full of citations from Aristotle,
Plato, and the entire horde of philosophers that readers are moved to ad-
miration and consider the authors to be well-read, erudite, and eloquent
men? Even more so when they cite Holy Scripture! People are bound to
say they are new St. Thomases and other doctors of the Church; and for
this they maintain so ingenious a decorum that in one line they depict a
heartbroken lover and in the next they write a little Christian sermon
that is a joy and a pleasure to hear or read. My book will lack all of this,
for I have nothing to note in the margin or to annotate at the end, and I
certainly don’t know which authors I have followed so that I can mention
them at the beginning, as everyone else does, in alphabetical order, be-
ginning with Aristotle and ending with Xenophon, and with Zoilus and
Zeuxis, though one was a slanderer and the other a painter. My book will
also lack sonnets at the beginning, especially sonnets whose authors are

i
:
.
‘4
a
;
i
I
E
H
i

2. La Galatea appeared in 1585 and the first part of Don Quixote in 1605; Cervantes published noth-
g in the intervening twenty years. He was fifty-eight years old in 1605.

Prologue 5

dukes, marquises, counts, bishops, ladies, or celebrated poets, though if.
asked two or three officials who are friends of mine, I know they would
give me a few that would be more than the equal of ones by writers who
are more famous in our Spain. In short, my friend,” I continued, “I have
decided that Don Quixote should remain buried in the archives of La
Mancha until heaven provides someone who can adorn him with all the
things he lacks; for I find myself incapable of correcting the situation be-
cause of my incompetence and my lack of learning, and because I am by
nature too lazy and slothful to go looking for authors to say what I know
how to say without them. This is the origin of the perplexity and abstrac-
tion in which you found me: the.reasons you have heard from me are
enough reason for my being in this state.”

On hearing this, my friend clapped his hand to his forehead, burst
into laughter, and said:

“By God, brother, now I am disabused of an illusion I have lived with
for all the time I have known you, for | always considered you perceptive
and prudent in everything you do. But now I see that you are as far from
having those qualities as heaven is from earth. How is it possible that
things so trivial and so easy to remedy canhave the power to perplex and
absorb an intelligence as mature as yours, and one so ready to demolish
and pass over much greater difficulties? By my faith, this does not have
its origins in lack of skill but in an excess of laziness and a paucity of rea-
soning. Do you want to see if what I say is true? Then listen carefully and
you will see how in the blink of an eye I confound all your difficulties and
remedy all the problems that you say bewilder you and make you fearful
to bring to light the history of your famous Don Quixote, the paragon
and model of all knights errant.”

“Tell me,” I replied, listening to what he was saying. “How do you in-
tend to fill the void of my fear and bring clarity to the chaos of my confu-
sion?”

To which he said:

“First, to solve the question of the sonnets, epigrams, or laudatory
poems by distinguished and titled people, which you need at the be-
ginning, you must make a certain effort and write them yourself, and then
you can baptize them with any name you want, attributing them to Prester
John of the Indies? or to the emperor of Trebizond, both of whom, I have

3. A legendary medieval Christian king and priest supposed to have ruled in a variety of places, in-
cluding Ethiopia and the Far East.

4. One of the four divisions of the Greek empire in the Middle Ages, it was frequently cited in nov-
els of chivalry.



--- Page 3 ---
6 Don Quixote

heard, wére famous poets; and if they were not, and certain pedants and
university graduates backbite and gossip about the truth of the attribu-
tions, you should not give.two maravedis> for what they say, because even if
they prove the lie, they won’t cit off the hand you used to write with. As
for citing iri the margins the books and authors that were the source of the
sayings and maxims you put into your history, all you have to do is insert
ome appropriate maxims or phrases in Latin, ones that you know by heart
; atleast, that won’t cost you too much trouble to look up, so that if you
‘of freedom and captivity, you can say:

i
i
‘

Non bene pro toto libertas venditur auro.6

ea And then, in the margin, you cite Horace or whoever it was who said
‘it. If the subject is the power of death, you can use: 7

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,-
Regumque ‘turres.7

Fi
i
i
i
i
i
i

If it's the friendship and love that God commands us to have for our
enemies, you turn right to Holy Scripture, which you can do with a min-
imum of effort, and say the words of God Himself: Ego autem dico vobis:
diligite inimicos vestros.8 If you mention evil thoughts; go to the Gospel:
De corde exeunt cogitationes malae.9 If the topic is the fickleness of friends,
Cato’s there, ready with his couplet:

Done eris felix, multos numerabis amicos,
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.10

And with these little Latin phrases and others like them, people will
think you are a grammarian; being one is no small honor and advantage
these days. As for putting annotations at the end of the book, certainly

5. An ancient Spanish coin introduced by the Moots; its precise value is difficult to determine,
since it changed over time.

6. The line (“Liberty cannot be bought for gold”) comes from a collection of Aesop's fables.

7. The line (“Pale death comes both to the hovel of che poor wretch and the palace of the mighty
ing”) is from Horace. :

8. Matthew 1 +4 (“But I say unto you, Love your enemies”).

i 9. Matthew 15:19 (“For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts”).

10. These lines are from Ovid, not Cato, and they translate roughly as “Nobody knows you when
you're down and out.”

Prologue 7

you can do it this way: if you name some giant in your book, make him
the giant Goliath, and just by doing that, which is almost no trouble at
all, you have a nice long annotation, because then you can write: The
giant Goliath, or Goliat, was a Philistine whom the shepherd David slew with
a stone in the valley of Terebint, as recounted in the Book of Kings, and you
can easily find the chapter. After this, to show that you are a scholar in
humane letters and a cosmographer, be sure to mention the Tajo River
in your history, and you'll have another worthy annotation if you write:
The Tajo River received its name from a king of all the Spains; itis born in that
place and dies in the Ocean Sea, kissing the walls of the famous city of Lisbon,
and it is thought that its sands are of gold, etc. If you mention thieves, I will
tell you the history of Cacus, which I know by heart; if the subject is
prostitutes, there’s the Bishop of Mondofiedo, who will provide you with
Lamia, Laida, and Flora, and citing him will be a credit to you;!! if you
refer to cruelty, Ovid will give you Medea; enchanters and sorcerers, and
you have Homer’s Calypso; valiant captains, and none other than Julius
Caesar will give you himself in his Commentaries, and Plutarch will pro-
vide you with a thousand Alexanders. If you write about love, with the
couple of ounces of Tuscan that you know you'll run right into Leén He-
breo,!? who will inflate your meters. And if you don’t care to travel to
foreign lands, right at home you have Fonseca’s Del amor de Dios,13
which summarizes everything that you or the most ingenious writer
might wish to know about the subject. In short, all you have to do is to
name the names or touch on the histories that | have mentioned, and
leave it to me to put in annotations and notes; I swear to you that I'll fill
up the margins and use four quartos of paper at the end. Let’s turn now to
the citation of authors, found in other books and missing in yours. The
solution to this is very simple, because all you have to do is find a book
that cites them all from A to Z, as you put it. Then you'll put that same
alphabet in your book, and though the lie is obvious it doesn’t matter,
since you'll have little need to use them; perhaps someone will be naive
enough to believe you have consulted all of them in your plain and sim-
ple history; if it serves no other purpose, at least a lengthy catalogue of
authors will give the book an unexpected authority. Furthermore, no

11. Fray Antonio de Guevara, a sixteenth-century writer, was, among other things, the bishop of
Mondojiedo. The irony lies in the fact that his books were well-known for their inaccuracies.

12. Author of Dialoghi d'amore (Dialogues of Love), his theories of love influenced Cervantes in the
writing of his pastoral novel, La Galatea.

13. The reference is to Tratado del amor de Dios (Treatise on the Love of God), published by Cristébal
. de Fonseca in 1592. .



--- Page 4 ---
Begiatnteentnenenntae sone

8 Don Quixote

one will try to determine if you followed them or did not follow them,
having nothing to gain from that. Besides, if I understand it correctly,
this book of yours has no need for any of the things you say it lacks, be-
cause all of it is an invective against books of chivalry, which Aristotle
never thought of, and St. Basil never mentioned, and Cicero never saw,
and whose unbelievable absurdities do not enter into the calculations of
factual truth, or the observations of astrology;!4 geometrical measure-
ments are of no importance to them, and neither is the refutation of ar-
guments used in rhetoric; there is no reason for your book to preach to
anyone, weaving the human with the divine, which is a kind of cloth no
Christian intelligence should wear. It only has to make use’of mimesis in
the writing, and the more precise that is, the better the writing will be.
And since this work of yours intends only to undermine the authority
and wide acceptance that books of chivalry have in.the world and
among. the public, there is no reason for you to go begging for maxims
from philosophers, counsel from Holy Scripture, fictions from poets, ora-
tions from thetoricians, or miracles from saints; instead you should
strive, in plain speech, with words that are straightforward, honest, and
well-placed, to make your sentences and phrases sonorous and entertain-
ing, and have them portray, as much as you can and as far as it is possible,
your intention, making your ideas clear without complicating and ob-
scuring them. Another thing to strive for: reading your history should
move the melancholy to laughter, increase the joy of the cheerful, not ir-
ritate the simple, fill the clever with admiration for its invention, not
give the serious reason to sco it, and allow the prudent to praise it. In
short, keep your eye on the goal of demolishing the ill-founded apparatus
of these chivalric books, despised by many and praised by so many more,
and if you accomplish this, you will have accomplished no small thing.”

In deep silence I listened to what my friend told me, and his words
made so great an impression on me that I did not dispute them but ac-
knowledged their merit and wanted to use them to write this prologue in
which you-will see, gentle reader, the cleverness of my friend, my good
fortune in finding the adviser I needed in time, and your own relief at
finding so sincere and uncomplicated a history as that of the famous Don
Quixote of La Mancha, who is thought by all the residents of the district
of Montiel!5 to have been the most chaste lover and most valiant knight

14. In contemporary terms, Cervantes is referring here to the science of astronomy.
15. A town in La Mancha, in the province of Ciudad Real.

Prologue : 9

seen in those environs for many years. I do not want to charge you too
much for the service I have performed in introducing you to so noble
and honorable a knight; but I do want you to thank me for allowing you
to make the acquaintance of the famous Sancho Panza, his squire, in
whom, in my opinion, I have summarized for you all the squirely wit and
charm scattered throughout the great mass of inane books of chivalry.

And having said this, may God grant you health and not forget me.
Vale .16 : :

16. “Farewell” in Latin.

|
|



