--- Page 1 ---
18

Don QuIxoTE

and wreaked thy vengeance on a thousand varlets
for dastardly assaults and villainies.
And if thy lady-love, fair Dulcinea,
treateth thee with harsh and rigorous scoyh,
and looketh not with pity on thy grief,
in such affliction let thy comfort be,
that Sancho Panza wast no go-betweén,
a fool he, she of stone, and thou no/lover.

Diatocus Between Pasieca AND RocINANTE
Sonnet

B. Why is it, Rocinante, yhat you're so thin? Ss

R. Too little food, and fAr too much hard labor.
B. But what about yoyr feed, your oats and hay?
R. My master doesn leave a bite for me.
B. Well, Sefior, yoyr lack of breeding shows
because your afs's tongue insults your master.
R. He's the ass, from the cradle to the grave.
Do you wart proof? See what he does for love.

B. You're a philosopher. R. T just don’t eat.
B. And do you complain of the squire?’ RR. Not enough.
How can I complain despite my aches and pains

if master and squire, or is it majordomo,
are nothing but skin and bone, like Rocinante?

R. It’s not too smart.

Part One of the Ingenious Gentleman

Don Quixote of La Mancha

Be

CHAPTER I

Which describes the condition and profession of the famous gentleman Don
Quixote of La Mancha

Somewhere in La Mancha, in a place whose name I do not care to re-
member, a gentleman lived not long ago, one of those who hasa lance
and ancient shield on a shelf and keeps a skinny nag and a greyhound for
racing. An occasional stew, beef more often than lamb, hash most
nights, eggs and abstinence on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, sometimes
squab as a treat on Sundays—these consumed three-fourths of his in-
come.! The rest went for a light woolen tunic and velvet breeches and
hose of the same material for feast days, while weekdays were honored
with dun-colored coarse cloth. He had a housekeeper past forty, a niece
not yet twenty, and a man-of-all-work who did everything from saddling
the horse to pruning the trees. Our gentleman was approximately fifty
years old; his complexion was weathered, his flesh scrawny, his face
gaunt, and he was a very early riser and a great lover of the hunt. Some
claim that his family name was Quixada, or Quexada, for there is a cer-
tain amount of disagreement among the authors who write of this mat-

1. Cervantes describes typical aspects of the ordinary life of the rural gentry. The indications of re-

duced circumstances include the foods eaten by Don Quixote: beef, for example, was less expensive
than lamb.



--- Page 2 ---
20 Don Quixore

ter, although reliable conjecture seems to indicate that his name was
Quexana. But this does not matter very much. to our story; in its telling
there is absolutely no deviation from the truth. :
And so, let it be said that this aforementioned gentleman spent his
times of leisure—which meant most of the year—reading books of
chivalry with so much devotion and enthusiasm that he forgot almost
completely about the hunt and even about the administration of his es-
tate; and in his rash curiosity and folly he went so far 4s to sell acres of
arable land in order to buy books of chivalry to read, and he brought as
many of them as he could into his house; and he thought none was as
fine as those composed by the worthy Feliciano de Silva,? because the
clarity of his prose and complexity of his language seemed to him more
valuable than pearls, in particular when he read the declarations and
missives of love, where he would often find written: The reason for the un-
reason to which my reason turns so weakens my reason that with reason I
complain of thy beauty. And also when he read: . . . the heavens on high
divinely heighten thy divinity with the stars and make thee deserving of
the deserts thy greatness deserves. :
With these words and phrases the poor gentleman-lost his mind, and
he spent sleepless nights trying to understand them and extract their
meaning, which Aristotle himself, if he came back to life for only that
purpose, would not have been able to decipher or uriderstand. Our gen-
tleman was not very happy with the wounds that Don Belianis gave and
received, because he imagined that no matter how great the physicians
and surgeons who cured him, he would still have his face and entire body
covered with scars and marks. But, even so, he praised the author for
having concluded his book with the promise of unending adventure, and
he often felt the desire to take up his pen and give it the conclusion
ptomised there; and no doubt he would have done so, and even pub-
lished it, if other greater and mote persistent thoughts had not prevented
hith from doing so. He often had discussions with the village priest—
who was a learned man, a graduate of Sigiienza3—regarding who had
been the greater knight, Palmerin of England or Amadis of Gaul; but
Master Nicolés, the village barber, said thar none was the equal of the
Knight of Phoebus, and if any could be compared to him, it was Don
Galaor, the brother of Amadis of Gaul, because he was moderate in

2. The author of several novels of chivalry; the phrases cited by Cervantes are typical of the lan-
guage in these books that drove Don Quixote mad.

3. The allusion is ironic: Sigtienza was a minor university, and its graduates had the reputation of
being not very well educated.

First Part, Chapter I 21

everything: a knight who was not affected, not as weepy as his brother,
and incomparable in questions of courage.

In short, our gentleman became so caught up in reading that he spent
his nights reading from dusk till dawn and his days reading from sunrise
to sunset, and so with too little sleep and too much reading his brains
dried up, causing him to lose his mind. His fantasy filled with everything
he had read in his books, enchantments as well as combats, battles, chal-
lenges, wounds, courtings, loves, torments, and other impossible foolish-
ness, and he became so convinced in his imagination of the truth of all
the countless grandiloquent and false inventions he read that for him no
history in the world was truer. He would say that El Cid Ruy Diazt had
been a very good knight but could not compare to Amadis, the Knight of
the Blazing Sword, who with a single backstroke cut two ferocious and
colossal giants in half. He was fonder of Bernardo del Carpio? because at
Roncesvalles® he had killed the enchanted Roland by availing himself of
the tactic of Hercules when he crushed Antaeus, the son of Earth, in his
arms. He spoke highly of the giant Morgante because, although he be-
longed to the race of giants, all of chem haughty and lacking in courtesy,
he alone was amiable and well-behaved. But, more than any of the oth-
ers, he admired Reinaldos de Montalb4n,? above all when he saw him
emerge from his castle and rob anyone he met, and when he crossed the
sea and stole the idol of Mohammed made all of gold, as recounted in his
history. He would have traded his housekeeper, and even his niece, for-
the chance to strike a blow at the traitor Guenelon.8

The truth is that when his mind was completely gone, he had the
strangest thought any lunatic in the world ever had, which was that it
seemed reasonable and necessary to him, both for the sake of his honor
and as a service to the nation, to become a knight errant and travel the
world with his armor and his horse to seek adventures and engage in
everything he had read that knights errant engaged in, righting all man-
ner of wrongs and, by seizing the opportunity and placing himself in dan-
ger and ending those wrongs, winning eternal renown and everlasting
fame. The poor man imagined himself already wearing the crown, won by

__ 4. Ahistorical figure (eleventh century) who has passed into legend and literacuze.
5. A legendary hero, the subject of ballads as well as poems and plays.

6. The site in the Pyrenees, called Roncesvaux in French, where Charlemagne's army fought the
Saracens in 778. °

7. A hero of the French chansons de geste; in some Spanish versions, he takes part in the battle of
Roncesvalles. .

8. The traitor responsible for the defeat of Charlemagne’s army at Roncesvalles.



--- Page 3 ---
22 * Don Quixote

the valor of his arm, of the empire of Trebizond at the very least; and so it
was that with these exceedingly agreeable thoughts, and carried away by
the extraordinary pleasure he took in them, he hastened to put into effect
what he so fervently desired. And the first thing he did was to attempt to
clean some armor that had belonged to his great-grandfathers and,
stained with rust and covered with mildew, had spent many long years
stored and forgotten in a corner. He did the best he could to clean and re-
pair it, but he saw that it had a great defect, which was that instead of a
full sallet helmet with an. attached neckguard, there was only a simple
headpiece; but he compensated for this with his industry, and out of
pasteboard he fashioned a kind of half-helmet that, when attached to the

. headpiece, took on the appearance of a full sallet. It is true that in order

to test if it was strong and could-withstand a blow, he took out his sword
and struck it twice, and with the first blow he undid in a moment what it
had taken him a week to create; he could not help being disappointed at
the ease with which he had hacked it to pieces, and to protect against
that danger, he made another one, placing strips of iron on the inside so
that he was satisfied with its strength; and not wanting to put it to the test
again, he designated and accepted it as an extremely fine sallet. :
Then he went to look at his nag, and though its hooves had more
cracks than his master’s pate and it showed more flaws than Gonnella’s
horse, that tantum pellis et ossa fuit,9 it seemed to him that Aléxander’s
Bucephalus and El Cid’s Babieca were not its equal. He spent four days
thinking about the name he would give it; for—as he told himself—it
was not seemly that the horse of so famous a knight, and a steed so in-
trinsically excellent, should not have a worthy name; he was looking for
the precise name that would declare what the horse had been before its
master became a knight errant and what it was now; for he was deter-
mined that if the master was changing his condition, the horse too

would change its name to one that would win the fame and recognition

its new position and profession deserved; and so, after many names that
he shaped and discarded, subtracted from and added to, unmade and re-
made in his memory and imagination, he finally decided to call the horse
Rocinante,!° a name, in his opinion, that was noble, sonorous, and teflec-
tive of what it had been when it was a nag, before it was what it was now,
which was the foremost nag in all the world. :

9. Pietro Gonnella, the jester at the court of Ferrara, had a horse famous for being skinny. The Latin
translates as “was nothing but skin and bones.”

10. Rocin means “nag”; ance means “before,” both temporally and spatially.

First Part, Chapter I 23

Having given a name, and one so much to his liking, to his horse, he
wanted to give one to himself, and he spent another eight days ponder-
ing this, and at last he called himself Don Quixote,!! which is why, as has
been noted, the authors of this absolutely true history determined that
he undoubtedly must have been named Quixada and not Quexada, as

~ others have claimed. In any event, recalling that the valiant Amadis had

not been content with simply calling himself Amadis but had added the
name of his kingdom and realm in order to bring it fame, and was known
as Amadis of Gaul, he too, like a good knight, wanted to add the name of
his birthplace to his own, and he called himself Don Quixote of La Man-
cha,!? thereby, to his mind, clearly stating his lineage and country and
honoring it by making it part of his title. :

Having cleaned his armor and made a full helmet out of a simple
headpiece, and having given a name to his horse and decided on
one for himself, he realized that the only thing left for him to do was
to find a lady to love; for the knight errant without a lady-love was
a tree without leaves or fruit, a body without a soul. He said to him-
self:

“If I, because of my evil sins, or my good fortune, meet with a giant
somewhere, as ordinarily befalls knights errant, and I unseat him with a
single blow, or cut his body in half, or, in short, conquer and defeat him,
would it not be good to have someone to whom I could send him so that
he might enter and fall to his knees before my sweet lady, and say in the .
humble voice of surrender: ‘I, lady, am the giant Caraculiambro, lord of
the island Malindrania, defeated in single combat by the never suffi-
ciently praised knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, who commanded me
to appear before your ladyship, so that your highness might dispose of me
as you chose’?”

Oh, how pleased our good knight was when he had made this speech,
and even more pleased when he discovered the one he could call his
lady! It is believed that in a nearby village there was a very attractive
peasant girl with whom he had once been in love, although she, appar-
ently, never knew or noticed. Her name was Aldonza Lorenzo,13 and he
thought it a good idea to call her the lady of his thoughts, and, searching
for a name that would not differ significantly from his and would suggest

11. Quixote means the section of amor that covers the thigh.
12. La Mancha was not one of the noble medieval kingdoms associated with knighthood,

13. Aldonza, considered to be a common, rustic name, had comic connotations.



--- Page 4 ---
24 Don QuixoTE

and imply. that of a princess and great lady, he decided to call her
Dulcinea. of ‘Toboso,14 because she came from Toboso, a name, to his
mind, that was musical and beautiful and filled with significance, as
were-all:the others he had given to himself and everything pertaining
tohim. =. ;

i

CHAPTER II

Which tells of the first sally that the ingenious Don Quixote made from his
native land

And._so, having completed these preparations, he did not wish to wait
any longer to put his thought into effect, impelled by the great need in
the world that he believed was‘caused by his delay, for there were evils to
undo, wrongs to right, injustices co correct, abuses to gfneliorate, and of-
fenses to rectify. And one. morning before dawn gf a hot day in July,
without informing a single person of his intentiqxs, and without anyone
seeing him, he armed himself with all his grfor and mounted Roci-
nante, wearing his poorly constructed helmet, and he grasped his shield
and took up his lance and through the sjde door of a corral he rode out
into the countryside with great joy and delight at seeing how easily he
had given a beginning to his virtugfis desire. But as soon as he found
himself in the countryside he was/assailed by a thought so terrible it al-
most made him abandon the enéerprise he had barely begun; he recalled
that he had not been dubbed a knight, and according to the law of
chivalry, he could not and@/must not take up arms against any knight;
since this was the case, Ke would have to bear blank arms, like a novice
knight without a devjée on his shield, until he had earned one through
his own efforts. ‘se thoughts made him waver in his purpose; bur, his
madness being sfonger than any other faculty, he resolved to have him-
self dubbed a hight by the first person he met, in imitation of many oth-
ers who ha¥one the same, as he had read in the books that had brought
him to this state. As for his arms being blank and white,! he planned to

14, Her name is based on the word dulce (“sweet”).
‘The wordplay is based on the word blanco, which can mean both “blank” and “white.”

First Part, Chapter i - 25

clean them so much that when the dubbing took place they would be
whiter than ermine; he immediately grew serene and continued on his
way, following only the path his horse wished to take, believing that the
virtue of his adventures lay in doing this.

And as our new adventurer traveled along, he talkéd to himself, saying:

“Who can doubt that in times to come, whey the true history of my
famous deeds comes to light, the wise man w compiles them, when he
begins to recount my first sally so early in thé day, will write in this man-
ner: ‘No sooner had rubicund Apollo spfead over the face of the wide
and spacious earth the golden strands“of his beauteous hair, no sooner
had diminutive and bright-hued bids with dulcet tongues greeted in
sweet, mellifluous harmony the advent of rosy dawn, who, forsaking the
soft couch of her zealous consgft, revealed herself to mortals through the
doors and balconies of the Manchegan horizon, than the famous knight
Don Quixote of La Mgricha, abandoning the downy bed of idleness,
mounted his famous steed, Rocinante, and commenced to ride through
the ancient and illustrious countryside of Montiel.’ ”

And it was true that this was where he was riding. And he continued:

“Fortunate the time and blessed the age when my famous deeds will
come to light, worthy of being carved in bronze,éculpted in marble, and
painted on tablets as a remembrance in the’future. O thou, wise en-
chanter, whoever thou mayest be, whose taék it will be to chronicle this
wondrous history! I implore thee not pf overlook my good Rocinante, :
my eternal companion on all my trayéls and peregrinations.”

Then he resumed speaking as ifhe truly were in love:

“O Princess Dulcinea, mistye&s of this captive heart! Thou hast done
me grievous harm in biddipg me farewell and reproving me with the
harsh affliction of coi nding that I not appear before thy sublime
beauty. May it please
suffers countless trials for the sake of thy love.”

He strung these together with other foolish remarks, all

could. As a result, his pace was so slow, and the sun
ardently, that it would have melted his brains if hi

He rode almost all that day and nothing wo,
him, which caused him to despair because he“wanted an immediate en-
counter with someone on whom to test/he valor of his mighty arm.
Some authors say his first adventure wag’the one in Puerto Lapice; others
claim it was the adventure of the windmills; but according to what I
have been able to determine with regard to this matter, and what I have



