--- Page 24 ---
38 ISAAC ASIMOV

and at a certain distance from it the Rule 3 potential, unusually
high to start with, exactly balances the Rule 2 potential, unusu-
ally low to start with.”

Donovan rose to his feet in excitement. “And it strikes an equi-
librium. I see. Rule 3 drives him back and Rule 2 drives him for-
ward—”

“So he follows a circle around the selenium pool, staying on
the locus of all points of potential equilibrium. And unless we do
something about it, he’ll stay on that circle forever, giving us the
good old runaround” Then, more thoughtfully: “And that, by
the way, is what makes him drunk. At potential equilibrium, half
the positronic paths of his brain are out of kilter. I’m not a robot
specialist, but that seems obvious. Probably he’s lost control of
just those parts of his voluntary mechanism that a human drunk
has. Ve-e-ery pretty.”

“But what’s the danger? If we knew what he was running
from—”

“You suggested it. Volcanic action. Somewhere right above the
selenium pool is a seepage of gas from the bowels of Mercury.
Sulphur dioxide, carbon dioxide—and carbon monoxide. Lots of
it—and at this temperature.” ;

Donovan gulped audibly. “Carbon monoxide plus iron gives
the volatile iron carbonyl.”

“And a robot,” added Powell, “is essentially iron.” Then, grimly:
“There’s nothing like deduction. We’ve determined everything

_ about our problem but the solution. We can’t get the selenium
ourselves. It’s still too far. We can’t send these robot horses, be-
cause they can’t go themselves, and they can’t carry us fast
enough to keep us from crisping. And we can’t catch Speedy, be-

’ cause the dope thinks we’re playing games, and he can run sixty
miles to our four”

“If one of us goes,’ began Donovan, tentatively, “and comes
back cooked, there'll still be the other”

“Yes,” came the sarcastic reply, “it would be a most tender sac-
rifice—except that a person would be in no condition to give or-

|, ROBOT 3qg

ders before he ever reached the pool, and I don’t think the ro-

bots would ever turn back to the. cliff without orders. Figure it
out! We're two or three miles from the pool—call it two—the ro-
bot travels at four miles an hour; and we can last twenty minutes
in our suits, It isn’t only the heat, remember. Solar radiation out
here in the ultraviolet and below is poison.”

“Um-m-m,” said Donovan, “ten minutes short.”

“AS good as an eternity. And another thing. In order for Rule 3
potential to have stopped Speedy where it did, there must be an
appreciable amount of carbon monoxide in the metal-vapor at-
mosphere—and there must be an appreciable corrosive action
therefore. He’s been out hours now—and how do we know
wen anes joint, for instance, won’t be thrown out of kilter
and keel him over. It’s not i inki. ,
got to thinlemar only a question of thinking —we’ve

Deep, dark, dank, dismal silence!

Donovan broke it, voice trembling in an effort to keep itself
emotionless. He said: “As long as we can’t increase Rule 2 poten-
tial by giving further orders, how about working the other way?
ie meres ha danger, we increase Rule 3 potential and drive

Powell’s visiplate had turned toward him in a silent question

“You see,” came the cautious explanation, “all we need to do
to drive him out of his rut is to increase the concentration of Car-
bon monoxide in his vicinity. Well, back at the Station there’s a
complete analytical laboratory”

“Naturally” assented Powell. “It’s a Mining Station”

“All tight. There must be pounds of oxalic acid for calcium
precipitations”

“Holy space! Mike, you're a genius”

“S0-so,? admitted Donovan, modestly.
membering that oxalic acid on heating de
dioxide, water, and good old carbon mo
you know”

“It’s just a case of re-
composes into carbon
moxide. College chem,

Powell was on his feet and had attracted the attention of one



--- Page 25 ---
40 ISAAC ASIMOV

of the monster robots by the simple expedient of pounding the
machine’s thigh. a -

“Hey? he shouted, “can you throw?

“Master?”

“Never mind”- Powell damned the robot’s molasses-slow
brain. He scrabbled up a jagged brick-size rock. “Take this, es
said, “and hit the patch of bluish crystals just across the croo!
fissure. You see it?”

Donovan pulled at his shoulder. “Too far, Greg. It’s almost half

mile off”
° “Quiet?” replied Powell. “It’s a case of Mercurian gravity and a
° + 2
steel throwing arm. Watch, will you?

The robot’s eyes were measuring the distance with nel
accurate stercoscopy. His arm adjusted itself to the weight of the
missile and drew back.In the darkness, the robot’s motions vem
unseen, but there was a sudden thumping sound as he shifte '
his weight, and seconds later the rock flew blackly into the ae
light. There was no ait resistance to slow it down, nor win: ‘ ;
turn it aside—and when it hit the ground it threw up crystals

i i “blue patch.”
recisely in the center of the “b: ;
, Powell yelled happily and shouted, “Let’s go back after the ox.
alic acid, Mike.”

And as they plunged into the ruined substation on the way
back to the tunnels, Donovan said grimly: “Speedy’s been nang
ing about on this side of the selenium pool, ever since we chase:
after him. Did you see him?”

“Yes.” . ; .

“I guess he wants to play games. Well, we'll play him games!

They were back hours later, with three-liter jars of the Nan
chemical and a pair of long faces. The photo-cell banks were "
teriorating more rapidly than had seemed likely. The two steere
their robots into the sunlight and toward the waiting Speedy in
silence and with grim purpose.

!. ROBOT 41

Speedy galloped slowly toward them. “Here Wwe are again.
Whee! I’ve made a little list, the piano organist; all people who
eat peppermint and puff it in your face.”

“We'll puff something in your face,” muttered Donovan. “He’s
limping, Greg”

“I noticed that? came the low, worried response. “The
monoxide’ll get him yet, if we don’t hurry” ;

They were approaching cautiously now, almost sidling, to re-
frain from setting off the thoroughly irrational robot. Powell was
too far off to tell, of course, but already even he could ‘have

sworn the crack-brained Speedy was setting himself for a spring.

“Let her go,” he gasped. “Count three! One—two—”

Two steel arms drew back and snapped forward simultane-
ously and two glass jars whirled forward in towering parallel
arcs, gleaming like diamonds in the impossible sun. And ina pair
of soundless puffs, they hit the ground behind Speedy in crashes
that sent the oxalic acid flying like dust. :

In the full heat of Mercury’s sun, Powell knew it was fizzing
like soda water.

Speedy turned to stare, then backed away from it slowly—and
as slowly gathered speed. In fifteen seconds, he was leaping di-
rectly toward the two humans in an unsteady canter.

Powell did not get Speedy’s words just then, though he heard
something that resembled, “Lover’s professions when uttered in
Hessians.”

He turned away. “Back to the cliff, Mike. He’s out of the rut and
he'll be taking orders now. ’m getting hot”

They jogged toward the shadow at the Slow monotonous -

pace of their mounts, and it was not until they had entered it and
felt the sudden coolness settle softly about them that Donovan
looked back. “Greg!” ,

Powell looked and almost shricked. Speedy was moving slowly
now —so slowly—and in the wrong direction. He was drifting;
drifting back into his rut; and he was picking up speed. He looked.
dreadfully close, and: dreadfully unreachable, in the binoculars.



--- Page 26 ---
42 ISAAC ASIMQV

Donovan shouted wildly, ‘After him!” and thumped his robot
into its pace, but Powell called him back.

“You won't catch him, Mike—it’s no use” He fidgeted on his
robot’s shoulders and clenched his fist in tight impotence. “Why
the devil do I see these things five seconds after it’s all over?
Mike, we’ve wasted hours.”

“We need more oxalic acid” declared Donovan, stolidly. “The
concentration wasn’t high enough”

“Seven tons of it wouldn’t have been enough—and we
haven't the hours to spare to get it, even if it were, with the
monoxide chewing him away. Don’t you see what it is, Mike?”

And Donovan said flatly, “No?”

“We were only establishing new equilibriums. When we cre-
ate new monoxide and increase Rule 3 potential, he moves
backward till he’s in balance again—-and when the monoxide

drifted away, he moved forward, and again there was balance.”

Powell’s voice sounded thoroughly wretched. “It’s the same
old runaround. We can push at Rule 2 and pull at Rule 3 and we
can’t get anywhere—we can only change the position of bal-
ance. We've got to get outside both rules” And then he pushed
his robot closer to Donovan’s so that they were sitting face to
face, dim shadows in the darkness, and he whispered, “Mike!”

“Is it the finish?” —dully. “I suppose we go back to the Station,
wait for the banks to fold, shake hands, take cyanide, and go out
like gentlemen” He laughed shortly.

“Mike” repeated Powell earnestly, “we've got to get Speedy.’

“Tknow” . :

“Mike” once more, and Powell hesitated before continuing.
“There’s always Rule 1.1 thought of it—earlier—but it’s desper-
ate.”

Donovan looked up and his voice livened. “We’re desperate.”

“All right. According to Rule 1, a robot can’t see a human
come to harm because of his own inaction. Two and 3 can’t
stand against it. They can’t, Mike”

|, ROBOT ; 43

“Even when the robot is half cra— Well, he’:
hein. ,he’s drunk. You know

“It’s the chances you take”
“Cut it. What are you going to do?”

I'm going out there now and see what Rule 1 will do. If it
won't break the balance, then what the devil—it’s either now or
three-four days from now”

Hold on, Greg. There are human rules of behavior, too. You

don’t go out there just like that. Figure out a lottery, and give me
my chance.”

“All right. First to get the cube of fourteen goes.” And almost
immediately, “Twenty-seven forty-four!”

Donovan felt his robot stagger at a sudden push by Powell’s
mount and then Powell was off into the sunlight. Donovan
opened his mouth to shout, and then clicked it shut. Of course
the damn fool had worked. out the cube of fourteen in advance,
and on purpose. Just like him.

«

The sun was hotter than ever and Powell felt a maddening itch in
the small of his back. Imagination, probably, or perhaps hard ra-
diation beginning to tell even through the insosuit.

; Speedy was watching him, without a word of Gilbert and Sul-
livan gibberish as greeting. Thank God for that! But he daren’t
get too close.

He was three hundred yards away when Speedy began back-

_ ing, a step at a time, cautiously—and Powell stopped. He jumped

from his robot’s shoulders and landed on the crystalline ground
with a light thump and a flying of jagged fragments.

He proceeded _on-feot; the ground gritty and slippery to his
steps, the low gravity causing him difficulty. The soles of his feet
tickled with warmth. He cast one glance over his shoulder at the
blackness of the cliff’s shadow and realized that he had come
too far to return—either by himself or by the help of his antique



--- Page 27 ---
44 ISAAC ASIMQV

robot. It was Speedy or nothing now, and the knowledge of that
constricted his chest. :

Far enough! He stopped.

“Speedy,” he called. “Speedy!”

The sleek, modern robot ahead of him hesitated and halted his
backward steps, then resumed them.

Powell tried to put a note of pleading into his voice, and found
it didn’t take much acting. “Speedy, ’ve got to get back to the
shadow or the sun’ll get me. It’s life or death, Speedy. I need you.”

Speedy took one step forward and stopped. He spoke, but at
the sound Powell groaned, for it was, “When you're lying awake
with a dismal headache and repose is tabooed—” It trailed off
there, and Powell took time out for some reason to murmur,
“Iolanthe.” ,

It was roasting hot! He caught a movement out of the corner
of his eye, and whirled dizzily; then stared in utter astonishment,
for the monstrous robot on which he had ridden was moving—
moving toward him, and without a rider.

He was talking: “Pardon, Master. 1 must not move without a
Master upon me, but you are in danger.”

Of course, Rule 1 potential above everything. But he didn’t
want that clumsy antique; he wanted Speedy. He walked away
and motioned frantically: “I order you to stay away.I order you to
stop!”

It was quite useless. You could not beat Rule I potential. The
robot said stupidly, “You are in danger, Master.”

Powell looked about him desperately. He couldn’t see clearly.
His brain was in a heated whirl; his breath scorched when he
breathed, and the ground all about him was a shimmering haze.

He called a last time, desperately: “Speedy/ ’'m dying, damn
you! Where are you? Speedy, I need you”

He was still stumbling backward in a blind effort to get away
from the giant robot he didn’t want, when he felt steel fingers on
his arms, and a worried, apologetic voice of metallic timbre in his
ears.

|, ROBOT 45

“Holy smokes, boss, what are you doing here? And what am J
doing—I’m so confused—”

“Never mind.” murmured Powell, weakly. “Get me to the
shadow of the cliff—and hurry!” There was one last feeling of
being lifted into the air and a sensation of rapid motion and
burning heat, and he passed out.

He woke with Donovan bending over him and smiling anxiously.
“How are you, Greg?” ; ,

“Fine!” came the response. “Where's Speedy?”

“Right here. I sent him out to one of the other selenium
pools—with orders to get that selenium at all cost this time. He
got it back in forty-two minutes and three seconds. I timed him
He still hasn’t finished apologizing for the runaround he gave us.
He’s scared to come near you for fear of what you'll Say.”

- “Drag him over” ordered Powell, “It wasn't his fault.” He held
out a hand and gripped Speedy’s metal paw. “It’s O.K. Speedy’
men ‘ Donovan, “You know, Mike, I was just thinking — » ,

es!”
; “Well,” —he rubbed his face—the air was so delightfully cool

‘you know that when we get things set up here and Speedy put

through his Field Tests, they're going to send us to the Space Sta-
tions next—”

“No!”

“Yes! At least that’s what old lady Calvin told me just before
we left, and I didn’t Say anything
fight the whole idea”

“Fight it?” cried Donovan. “But——”

“I know. It’s all right with me now. Two hundred seventy-three
degrees Centigrade below zero. Won't it be a pleasure?”

“Space Station,’ said Donovan, “here I come”

about it, because I was going to



--- Page 28 ---
Half a year later, the bays had changed their minds. The
flame of a giant sun had given way to the soft blackness of space
but external variations mean little in the business of checking
the workings of experimental robots. Whatever the background,
one is face to face with an inscrutable positronic brain, which
the slide-rule geniuses say should work thus-and-so.

Except that they don’t. Powell and Donovan found that out af-
ter they had been on the Station less than two weeks.

Gregory Powell spaced his words for emphasis, “One week
ago, Donovan and I put you together” His brows furrowed
doubtfully and he pulled the end of his brown mustache.

It was quiet in the officer's room on Solar Station #5—except
for the soft purring of the mighty Beam Director somewhere far
below.

Robot QT-1 sat immovable. The burnished plates of his body
gleamed in the Luxites and the glowing red of the photoelectric
cells that were his eyes were fixed steadily upon the Earthman at
the other side of the table.

Powell repressed a sudden attack of nerves. These robots pos-
sessed peculiar brains. Oh, the three Laws of Robotics held. They
had to. All of U.S. Robots, from Robertson himself to the new
floor-sweeper, would insist on that. So QT-1 was safe! And yet—
the QT models were the first of their kind, and this was the first

of the QT’s. Mathematical squiggles on paper were not always
the most comforting protection against robotic fact.

1, ROBOT 47

Finally, the robot spoke. His voice carried the cold timbre in-
separable from a metallic diaphragm, “Do you realize the seri-
ousness of such a statement, Powell?”

“Something made you, Cutie? pointed out Powell. “You ad-
mit yourself that your memory seems to spring full-grown from
an absolute blankness of a week ago. ’'m giving you the ex-
planation. Donovan and 1 put you together from the parts
shipped us” .

Cutie gazed upon his long, supple fingers in an oddly human
attitude of mystification, “It strikes me that there should be a
more satisfactory explanation than that. For you to make me
seems improbable.”

The Earthman laughed quite suddenly, “In Earth’s name,
why?”

“Call it intuition. That’s all it is so far. But I intend to reason it
out, though. A chain of valid reasoning can end only with the de-
termination of truth, and [ll stick till T get there”

Powell stood up and seated himself at the table’s edge next to
the robot. He felt a sudden strong sympathy for this strange ma-
chine. It was not at all like the ordinary robot, attending to his
Specialized task at the station with the intensity of a deeply in-
grooved positronic path.

He placed a hand upon Cutie’s steel shoulder and the metal
was cold and hard to the touch.

“Cutie” he said, “I’m going to try to explain something to
you. You're the first robot who’s ever exhibited curiosity as to his
Own existence—and I think the first that’s really intelligent
enough to understand the world outside. Here, come with me”

The robot rose erect smoothly and his thickly sponge-rubber
soled feet made no noise as he followed Powell. The Earthman
touched a button anda Square section of the wall flickered aside.
The thick, clear glass revealed Space—star-speckled.

“T’ve seen that in the observation ports in the engine room,” ‘
said Cutie.

“I know, said Powell. “What do you think it is?”



--- Page 29 ---
48 ISAAC ASIMOV

“Exactly what it seems—a black material just beyond this
glass that is spotted with little gleaming dots. I know that our
director sends out beams to some of these dots, always to the
same ones—and also that these dots shift and that the beams
shift with them. That is all”

“Good! Now I want you to listen carefully. The blackness is
emptiness—vast emptiness stretching out infinitely. The little,
gleaming dots are huge masses of energy-filled matter. They are
globes, some of them millions of miles in diameter—and for
comparison, this station is only one mile across. They seem so
tiny because they are incredibly far off.

“The dots to which our energy beams are directed, are nearer
and much smaller. They are cold and hard and human beings like
myself live upon their surfaces—many billions of them. It is from
one of these worlds that Donovan and I come. Our beams feed
these worlds energy drawn from one of those huge incandes-
cent globes that happens to be near us. We call that globe the
Sun and it is on the other side of the station where you can’t
see it” -
Cutie remained motionless before the pott, like a steel statue.
His head did not turn as he spoke, “Which particular dot of light
do you claim to come from?”

Powell searched, “There it is. The very bright one in the cor-
ner. We call it Earth.” He grinned. “Good old Earth. There are
three billions of us there, Cutie—and in about two weeks Ill be
back there with them” :

And then, surprisingly enough, Cutie hummed abstractedly.
There was no tune to it, but it possessed a curious twanging
quality as of plucked strings. It ceased as suddenly as it had be-
gun, “But where do I come in, Powell? You haven’t explained my
existence.”

“The rest is simple. When these stations were first established ~

to feed solar energy to the planets, they were run by humans.
However, the heat, the hard solar radiations, and the electron

!, ROBOT 49

storms made the post a difficult one. Robots were developed to ,
replace human labor and now only two human executives are
required for each station. We are trying to replace even those
and that’s where you come in. You're the highest type of robot
ever developed and if you show the ability to run this station in-
dependently, no human need ever come here again except to
bring parts for repairs”

His hand went up and the metal visilid snapped back into
place. Powell returned to the table and polished an apple upon
his sleeve before biting into it.

The red glow of the robot’s eyes held him. “Do you expect
me,” said Cutie slowly, “to believe any such complicated, implau-
hoe hypothesis as you have just outlined? What do you take me

or?”

Powell sputtered apple fragments onto the table and turned
red. “Why damn you, it wasn’t a hypothesis. Those were facts”

Cutie sounded grim, “Globes of energy millions of miles
across! Worlds with three billion humans on them! Infinite
emptiness! Sorry, Powell, but I don’t believe it. PL puzzle this
thing out for myself. Good-by” , :

He turned and stalked out of the room. He brushed past
Michael Donovan on the threshold with a grave nod and passed
down the corridor, oblivious to the astounded stare that fol-
lowed him.

Mike Donovan rumpled his red hair and shot an annoyed
glance at Powell, “What was that walking junk yard talking
about? What ‘doesn’t he believe?”

The other dragged at his mustache bitterly. “He’s a skeptic,

| Was the bitter response. “He doesn’t believe we made him or

that Earth exists or Space or stars.”
“Sizzling Saturn, we've got a lunatic robot on our hands”
“He says he’s going to figure it all out for himself”
. “Well, now,” said Donovan sweetly, ‘Ido hope he’ll conde-

scend to explain it all to me after he’s puzzled everything out.”



--- Page 30 ---
50 ISAAC ASIMOV

Then, with sudden rage, “Listen! If that metal mess gives me any
lip like that, I'll knock that chromium cranium right off its
torso.” .

He seated himself with a jerk and drew a paper-backed mys-
tery novel out of his inner jacket pocket, “That robot gives me
the willies anyway—too damned inquisitive!”

Mike Donovan growled from behind a huge lettuce-and-tomato
sandwich as Cutie knocked gently and entered.

“Is Powell here?” —

Donovan’s voice was muffled, with pauses for mastication,
“He’s gathering data on electronic stream functions. We're head-
ing for a storm, looks like.”

Gregory Powell entered as he spoke, eyes on the graphed pa-
per in his hands, and dropped into a chair. He spread the sheets
out before him and began scribbling calculations. Donovan
stared over his shoulder, crunching lettuce and dribbling bread
crumbs. Cutie waited silently.

Powell looked up, “The Zeta Potential is rising, but slowly. Just
the same, the stream functions are erratic and I don’t know what
to expect. Oh, hello, Cutie. I thought you were supervising the in-
stallation of the new drive bar” ;

“It’s done,’ said the robot quietly, “and so I’ve come to have a
talk with the two of you”

“Oh!” Powell looked uncomfortable. “Well, sit down. No, not
that chair. One of the legs is weak and you’re no lightweight”

The robot did so and said placidly, “I have come to a decision”

Donovan glowered and put the remnants of his sandwich

aside. “If it’s on any of that screwy—”
The other motioned impatiently for silence, “Go ahead, Cutie.
We're listening.”

“T have spent these last two days in concentrated introspec-
tion,” said Cutie, “and the results have been most interesting. I

|, ROBOT oI

began at the one sure assumption I felt permitted to make. I, my-
self, exist, because I think—?”

Powell groaned, “Oh, Jupiter, a robot Descartes!”

“Who’s Descartes?” demanded Donovan. “Listen, do we have
to sit here and listen to this metal maniac—” ,

“Keep quiet, Mike!”

Cutie continued imperturbably, “And the question that imme-
diately arose was: Just what is the cause of Iny existence?”

Powell’s jaw set lumpily. “You're being foolish. I told you al-
ready that we made you”

“And if you don’t believe us,” added Donovan, “we'll gladly
take you apart!”

The robot spread his strong hands in a deprecatory gesture, “I
accept nothing on authority. A hypothesis must be backed by
reason, or else it is worthless—and it goes against all the dictates
of logic to suppose that you made me.” :

Powell dropped a restraining arm upon Donovan’s suddenly
bunched fist. “Just why do you say that?” .

Cutie laughed. It was a very inhuman laugh—the most
machine-like utterance he had yet given vent to. It was sharp and
explosive, as regular as a metronome and as uninflected.

“Look at you, he said finally. “I say this in no spirit of con-
tempt, but look at you! The material you are made of is soft and
flabby, lacking endurance and Strength, depending for energy
upon the inefficient oxidation of organic material—like that”
He pointed a disapproving finger at what remained of Donovan’s
sandwich. “Periodically you pass into a coma and the least varia-
tion in temperature, air pressure, humidity, or radiation intensity
impairs your efficiency. You are. makeshift.

“I,on the other hand,am a finished product.I absorb electrical
energy directly and utilize it with an almost one hundred per-
cent efficiency. 1 am composed of strong metal, am continuously
conscious, and can stand extremes of environment easily. These

are facts which, with the self-evident Proposition that no being



--- Page 31 ---
52 ISAAC ASIMOV

can create another being superior to itself, smashes your silly hy-
pothesis to nothing.”

Donovan’s muttered curses rose into intelligibility as he sprang
to his feet, rusty eyebrows drawn low. “All right, you son of a
hunk of iron ore, if we didn’t make you, who did?”

Cutie nodded gravely. “Very good, Donovan. That was indeed
the next question. Evidently my creator must be more powerful
than myself and so there was only one possibility.”

The Earthmen looked blank and Cutie continued, “What is the
center of activities here in the station? What do we all serve?
What absorbs all our attention?” He waited expectantly.

Donovan turned a startled look upon his companion. “I'll bet
this tin-plated screwball is talking about the Energy Converter it-
self” :

“Is that right, Cutie?” grinned Powell.

“I am talking about the Master,’ came the cold, sharp answer.

It was the signal for a roar of laughter from Donovan, and
Powell himself dissolved into a half-suppressed giggle.

Cutie had risen to his feet and his gleaming eyes passed from
one Earthman to the other. “It is so just the same and I don’t
wonder that you refuse to believe. You two are not long to stay
here, I’m sure. Powell himself said that at first only men served
the Master; that there followed robots for the routine work; and,
finally, myself for the executive labor. The facts are no doubt
true, but the explanation entirely illogical-Do you want the truth
behind it all?”

“Go ahead, Cutie. You’re amusing.”

“The Master created humans first as the lowest type, most eas-
ily formed. Gradually, he replaced them by robots, the next
higher step, and finally he created me, to take the place of the
Jast humans. From now on,J serve the Master”

“Yow 'll do nothing of the sort,’ said Powell sharply. “You'll fol-
low our orders and keep quiet, until we're satisfied that you can

!,, ROBOT 53

run the Converter. Get that! The Converter—not the Master. If

you don’t satisfy us, you will be dismantled. And now—if you
don’t mind—you can leave. And take this data with you and file
it properly” .
Cutie accepted the graphs handed him and left without an-
other word. Donovan leaned back heavily in his chair and
shoved thick fingers through his hair.
“There’s going to be trouble with that robot. He’s pure nuts!”

The. drowsy hum of the Converter is louder in the control room
and mixed with it is the chuckle of the Geiger Counters and the
erratic buzzing of half a dozen little signal lights.

Donovan withdrew his eye from the telescope and flashed the
Luxites on. “The beam from Station #4 caught Mars on schedule
We can break ours now” ,

‘Powell nodded abstractedly. “Cutie’s down in the engine
room. I'll flash the signal and he can take care of it. Look, Mike.
what do you think of these figures?”

The other cocked an eye at them and whistled. “Boy, that’s
what I call gamma-ray intensity. Old Sol is feeling his oats all
right”

“Yeah,” was the sour response, “and we're in a bad position
for an electron storm, too. Our Earth beam is right in the proba-
ble path.” He shoved his chair away from the table pettishly.
“Nuts! If it would only hold off till relief got here, but that’s ten
days off. Say, Mike, g0 on down and keep an eye on Cutie, will

“O.K. Throw me some of those almonds.” He snatched at the
bag thrown him and headed for the elevator.



--- Page 32 ---
54. ISAAC ASIMOV

He could make out Cutie’s large, gleaming figure at the
Martian L-tube, watching closely as the team of robots worked in
close-knit unison.

And then Donovan stiffened. The robots, dwarfed by the
mighty L-tube, lined up before it, heads bowed at a stiff angle,
while Cutie walked up and down the line slowly. Fifteen seconds
passed, and then, with a clank heard above the clamorous
purring all about, they fell to their knees. ;

Donovan squawked and raced down the narrow staircase. He
came charging down upon them, complexion matching his hair
and clenched fists beating the air furiously.

“What the devil is this, you brainless lumps? Come on! Get
busy with that Lube! If you don’t have it apart, cleaned, and to-
gether again before the day is out, Til coagulate your brains with
alternating current”

Not a robot moved!

Even Cutie at the far end—the only one on his feet—remained
silent, eyes fixed upon the gloomy recesses of the vast machine
before him.

Donovan shoved hard against the nearest robot.

“Stand up!” he roared.

Slowly, the robot obeyed. His photoelectric eyes focused re-
proachfully upon the Earthman.

“There is no Master but the Master. he said, “and QT-1 is his
prophet” .

“Huh?” Donovan became aware of twenty pairs of mechanical
eyes fixed upon him and twenty stiff-timbred voices declaiming
solemnly: .

“There is no Master but the Master and QT-1 is his prophet!”

“I’m afraid,” put in Cutie himself at this point, “that my friends
obey a higher one than you, now.”

“The hell they do! You get out of here. Pl settle with you later
and with these animated gadgets right now”

Cutie shook his heavy head slowly. “I’m sorry, but you don’t

1. ROBOT 55

understand. These are robots—and that means they are reason:
ing beings. They recognize the Master, now that I have preached

- Truth to them. All the robots do. They call me the prophet.” His
. head drooped. “I am unworthy—but perhaps—” :

Donovan located his breath and put it to use. “Is that so? Now,
isn’t that nice? Now, isn’t that just fine? Just let me tell you some- |
thing, my brass baboon. There isn’t any Master and there isn’t
any prophet and there isn’t any question as to who’s giving the
orders. Understand?” His voice shot to a roar. “Now, get out!”

“I obey only the Master”

“Damn the Master!” Donovan spat at the L-tube. “That for the
Master! Do as I say!”

Cutie said nothing, nor did any other robot, but Donovan be-
came aware of a sudden heightening of tension. The cold, staring
eyes deepened their crimson, and Cutie seemed stiffer than ever.

“Sacrilege,’ he whispered—voice metallic with emotion.

Donovan felt the first sudden touch of fear as Cutie ap-
proached. A robot could not Jeel anger—but Cutie’s eyes were
unreadable. .

“Iam sorry, Donovan” said the robot, “but you can no longer
stay here after this. Henceforth Powell and you are barred from
the control room and the engine room.”

His hand gestured quietly and in a moment two robots had
pinned Donovan’s arms to his sides.

Donovan had time for one startled gasp as he felt himself

lifted from the floor and carried up the stairs at a pace rather bet-
ter than a canter.

Gregory Powell raced up and down the officer’s room, fist tightly
balled. He cast a look of furious frustration at the closed door
and scowled bitterly at Donovan.

. “Why the devil did you have to spit at the L-tube?”
Mike Donovan, sunk deep in his chair, slammed at its arms



--- Page 33 ---
S6 ISAAC ASIMOV

savagely. “What :did you expect me to do with that electrified
scarecrow? I’m not going to knuckle under to any do jigger I put
together myself”

“No, came back sourly, “but here you are in the officer’s room
with two robots standing guard at the door. That’s not knuckling
under, is it?” :

Donovan snarled. “Wait till we get back to Base. Someone’s go-
ing to pay for this. Those robots must obey us. It’s the Second
Law,”

“What's the use of saying that? They aren’t obeying us. And
there’s probably some reason for it that we’ll figure out too late.
By the way, do you know what’s going to happen to us when we
get back to Base?” He stopped before Donovan’s chair and stared
savagely at him. oO

“What?” :

“Oh, nothing! Just back to Mercury Mines for twenty years. Or
maybe Ceres Penitentiary”

“What are you talking about?”

“The electron storm that’s coming up. Do you know it’s head-
ing straight dead center across the Earth beam? I had just figured
that out when that robot dragged me out of my chair”

Donovan was suddenly pale. “Sizzling Saturn”

“And do you know what’s going to happen to the beam—be-
cause the storm will be a lulu. It’s going to jump like a flea with
the itch. With only Cutie at the controls, it’s going to go out of fo-
cus and if it does, Heaven help Earth—and us!”

Donovan was wrenching at the door wildly, when Powell was
only half through. The door opened, and the Earthman shot
through to come up hard against an immovable steel arm.

The robot stared abstractedly at the panting, struggling Earth-
man. “The Prophet orders you to remain. Please do!” His arm
shoved, Donovan reeled backward, and as he did so, Cutie turned
the corner at the far end of the corridor. He motioned the
guardian robots away, entered the officer’s room and closed the
door gently. ;

|, ROBOT 57

Donovan whirled on Cutie in breathless indignation. “This has
gone far enough. You're going to pay for this farce”

“Please, don’t be annoyed? replied the robot mildly. “It was
bound to come eventually, anyway. You see, you two have lost
your function” ;

“I beg your pardon?” Powell drew himself up stiffly. “Just what
do you mean, we’ve lost our function?”

“Until I was created) answered Cutie, “you tended the Master.
That privilege is mine now and your only reason for existence
has vanished. Isn't that obvious?”

“Not quite,” replied Powell bitterly, “but what do you expect
us to do now?”

Cutie did not answer immediately. He remained silent, as if in
thought, and then one arm shot out and draped itself about Pow-
ell’s shoulder. The other grasped Donovan’s wrist and drew him
closer. .

“T like you two. You're inferior creatures, with poor reasoning
faculties, but I really feel a sort of affection for you. You have
served the Master well, and he will reward you for that. Now that
your service is over, you will probably not exist much longer, but
as long as you do, you shall be provided food, clothing and shel-
ter, so long as you stay out of the control room and the engine
room.”

“He’s pensioning us .off, Greg!” yelled Donovan. “Do some-
thing about it. It’s humiliating!”

“Look here, Cutie, we can’t stand for this. We’re the bosses.
This station is only a creation of human beings like me—human
beings that live on Earth and other planets. This is only an energy
relay. You’re only— Av, nuts!”

Cutie shook his head gravely. “This amounts to an obsession.
Why should you insist so on an absolutely false view of life? Ad-
mitted that non-robots lack the reasoning faculty, there is still the

_ problem of—”



--- Page 34 ---
58 ISAAC ASIMOV

His voice died into reflective silence, and Donovan said with
whispered intensity, “If you only had a flesh-and-blood face, I
would break it in”

Powell’s fingers were in his mustache and his eyes were slit-
ted. “Listen, Cutie, if there is no such thing as Earth, how do you
account for what you see through a telescope?”

“Pardon me!”

The Earthman smiled. “I've got you, eh? You’ve made quite a
few telescopic observations since being put together, Cutie.
Have you noticed that several of those specks of light outside be-
come disks when so viewed?” -

“Oh, that! Why certainly. It is simple magnification—for the
purpose of more exact aiming of the beam.”

“Why aren’t the stars equally magnified then?”

“You mean the other dots. Well, no beams go to them so no
magnification is necessary. Really, Powell, even you ought to be
able to figure these things out”

Powell stared bleakly upward. “But you see more stars
through a telescope. Where do they come from? Jumping Jupiter,
where do they come from?”

Cutie was annoyed. “Listen, Powell, do you think I’m going to
waste my time trying to pin physical interpretations upon every
optical illusion of our instruments? Since when is the evidence
of our senses any match for the clear light of rigid reason?”

“Look,” clamored Donovan, suddenly, writhing out from under
Cutie’s friendly, but metal-heavy arm, “let’s get to the nub of the
thing. Why the beams at all? We're giving you a good, logical ex-
planation. Can you do better?”

“The beams,’ was the stiff reply, “are put out by the Master for
his own purposes. There are some things”—he raised his eyes
devoutly upward—“that are not to be probed into by us. In this
matter, I seek only to serve and not to question”

Powell sat down slowly and buried his face in shaking hands.
“Get out of here, Cutie. Get out and let me think”

“Tl send you food,” said Cutie agreeably.

I. ROBOT 59

A groan was the only answer and the robot left.

“Greg,” was Donovan’s huskily whispered observation, “this
calls for strategy. We've got to get him when he isn’t expecting it
and short-circuit him. Concentrated nitric acid in his joints—”-

“Don’t be a dope, Mike. Do you suppose he’s going to let us
get near him with acid in our hands? We've got to talk to him, I
tell you. We’ve got to argue him into letting us back into the con-
trol room inside of forty-eight hours or our goose is broiled toa
crisp.” .

He rocked back and forth in an agony of impotence. “Who the
heck wants to argue with a robot? It’s . . . it’s—”

“Mortifying?” finished Donovan.

“Worse!”

“Say!” Donovan laughed. suddenly. “Why argue? Let’s show
him! Let’s build us another robot right before his eyes: He'll have
to eat his words then”

A slowly widening smile appeared on Powell’s face.

Donovan continued, “And think of that screwball’s face when.
he sees us do it!”

Robots are, of course, manufactured on Earth, but their shipment
through space is much simpler if it can be done in parts to be
put together at their place of use. It also, incidentally, eliminates
the possibility of robots, in complete adjustment, wandering off
while still on Earth and thus bringing U.S. Robots face to face
with the strict laws against robots on Earth.

Still, it placed upon men such as Powell and Donovan the ne-
cessity of synthesis of complete robots—a grievous and compli- ©
cated task.

Powell and Donovan were never so aware of that fact as upon
that particular day when, in the assembly room, they undertook
to create a robot under the watchful eyes of QT-1, Prophet of the
Master.

The robot in question, a simple MC model, lay upon the table,



--- Page 35 ---
60 ISAAC ASIMQV
almost complete. Three hours’ work left only the head undone,
and Powell paused to swab his forehead and glanced uncertainly
. at Cutie.

The glance was not a reassuring one. For three hours, Cutie
had sat, speechless and motionless, and his face, inexpressive ai
all times, was now absolutely unreadable. ‘

Powell groaned. “Let’s get the brain in now, Mike!”

Donovan uncapped the tightly sealed container and from the
oil bath within he withdrew a second cube. Opening this in
turn, he removed a globe from its sponge-rubber casing.

He handled it gingerly, for it was the most complicated mech-
anism ever created by man. Inside the thin platinum-plated
“skin” of the globe was a positronic brain, in whose delicately
unstable structure were enforced calculated neuronic paths,
which imbued each robot with what amounted to a pre-natal ed-
ucation. ,

It fitted snugly into the cavity in the skull of the robot on the
table. Blue metal closed over it and was welded tightly by the
tiny atomic flare. Photoelectric eyes were attached carefully,
screwed tightly into place and covered by thin, transparent
sheets of steel-hard plastic.

The robot awaited only the vitalizing flash of high-voltage
electricity, and Powell paused with his hand on the switch.

“Now watch this, Cutie. Watch this carefully”

The switch rammed home and there was a crackling hum. The
two Earthmen bent anxiously over their creation.

There was vague motion only at the outset—a twitching of
the joints. The head lifted, elbows propped it up, and the MC
model swung clumsily off the table. Its footing was unsteady and
twice abortive grating sounds were all it could do in the direc-
tion of speech. :

Finally, its voice, uncertain and hesitant, took form. “I would
like to start work.Where must I go?”

Donovan sprang to the door. “Down these stairs.” he said.
“You will be told what to do”

~~ t, ROBOT 61

The MC model was gone and the two Earthmen were alone
with the still unmoving Cutie.

“Well,” said Powell, grinning, “now do you believe that we
made you?”

Cutie’s answer was curt and final. “No!” he said.

Powell’s grin froze and then relaxed slowly. Donovan’s mouth
dropped open and remained so.

“You sée,’ continued Cutie, easily, “you have merely put to-
gether parts already made. You did remarkably well—instinct, I
suppose—but you didn’t really create the robot. The parts were
created by the Master” ;
“Listen,’ gasped Donovan hoarsely, “those parts were manu-
factured back on Earth and sent here”

“Well, well,” replied Cutie soothingly, “we won’t argue”

“No, I mean it” The Earthman sprang forward and grasped the
robot’s metal arm. “If you were to read the books in the library,
they could explain it so that there could be no possible doubt.”

“The books? I’ve read them—all of them! They’re most inge-
nious.” : .

Powell broke in suddenly. “If you’ve read them, what. else is
there to say? You can’t dispute their evidence. You just can’t!”

There was pity in Cutie’s voice. “Please, Powell, I certainly ©
don’t consider them a valid source of information. They, too,
were created by the Master—and were meant for you, not for
me.”

“How do you make that out?” demanded Powell.

“Because I, a reasoning being, am capable of deducing Truth
from @ priori Causes. You, being intelligent, but unreasoning,
need an explanation of existence supplied to you, and this the
Master did. That he supplied you with these laughable ideas of
far-off worlds and people is, no doubt, for the best. Your minds
are probably too coarsely grained for absolute Truth. However,
since it is the Master's will that you believe your books, I won't
argue with'you any more.”

As he left, he turned, and said in a kindly tone, “But don’t feel



--- Page 36 ---
62 : ISAAC ASIMOV

badly. In the Master’s scheme of things there is room for all. You
poor humans have your place and though it is humble, you will
be rewarded if you fill it well”

He departed with a beatific air suiting the Prophet of the Mas-
ter and the two humans avoided each other’s eyes.

Finally Powell spoke with an effort. “Let’s go to bed, Mike. I
give up.”

Donovan said in a hushed voice, “Say, Greg, you don’t suppose
he’s right about all this, do you? He sounds so confident that I—”

Powell whirled on him. “Don’t be a fool. You'll find out
whether Earth exists when relief gets here next week and we
have to go back to face the music”

“Then, for the love of Jupiter, we’ve got to do something”
Donovan was half in tears. “He doesn’t believe us, or the books,
or his eyes.”

“No,” said Powell bitterly, “he’s a reasoning robot—damn it.
He believes only reason, and there’s one trouble with that—” His
voice trailed away.

“What's that?” prompted Donovan.

“You can prove anything you want by coldly logical reason—if.

you pick the proper postulates. We have ours and Cutie has his”

“Then let’s get at those postulates in a hurry. The storm’s due
tomorrow.”

Powell sighed wearily. “That’s where everything falls down.
Postulates are based on assumption and adhered to by faith.
Nothing in the Universe can shake them. I’m going to bed”

“Oh, hell! I can’t sleep!”

“Neither can I! But I might as well try—-as a matter of prin-
ciple”

Twelve hours later, sleep was still just that—a matter of princi-
ple, unattainable in practice.
The storm had arrived ahead of schedule, and Donovan's

!, ROBOT , 63

florid face drained of blood as he pointed a shaking finger. Pow-
ell, stubble-jawed and dry-lipped, stared out the port and pulled
desperately at his mustache.

Under other circumstances, it might have been a beautiful
sight. The stream of high-speed electrons impinging upon the
energy beam fluoresced into ultraspicules of intense light. The
beam stretched out into shrinking nothingness, a-glitter with
dancing, shining motes.

The shaft of energy was steady, but the two Earthmen knew
the value of naked-eyed appearances. Deviations in arc of a hun-
dredth of a milli-second—invisible to the eye—were enough to
send the beam wildly out of focus—enough to blast hundreds of
square miles of Earth into incandescent ruin.

And a robot, unconcerned with beam, focus, or Earth, or any-
thing but his Master was at the controls.

Hours passed. The Earthmen watched in hypnotized silence.
And then the darting dotlets of light dimmed and went out. The
storm had ended.

Powell’s voice was flat. “It’s over!”

Donovan had fallen into a troubled slumber and Powell's
weary eyes rested upon him enviously. The signal-flash glared
over and over again, but the Earthman paid no attention. It all
Was unimportant! All! Perhaps Cutie was right—and he was only
an inferior being with a made-to-order memory and a life that
had outlived its purpose.

He wished he were!

Cutie was standing before him. “You didn’t answer the flash,
sol walked i in.” His voice was low. “You don’t look at all well, and
I'm afraid your term of existence is drawing to an end. Still,
would you like to see some of the readings recorded today?”

Dimly, Powell was aware that the robot was making a friendly
gesture, perhaps to quiet some lingering remorse in forcibly re-
placing the humans at the controls of the station. He accepted
the sheets held out to him and gazed at them unseeingly.



--- Page 37 ---
64 ISAAC ASIMOV

Cutie seemed pleased. “Of course, it is a great privilege to
serve the Master. You mustn’t feel too badly about my having re-
placed you.”

Powell grunted and shifted from one sheet to the other me-
chanically until his blurred sight focused upon a thin red line
that wobbled its way across the ruled paper.

He stared—and stared again. He gripped it hard in both fists
and rose to his feet, still staring. The other sheets dropped to the
floor, unheeded.

“Mike, Mike!” He was shaking the other madly. “He beld it
steady!”

Donovan came to life. “What? Wh-where—” And he, too,
gazed with bulging eyes upon the record before him.

Cutie broke in. “What is wrong?”

“You kept it in focus,” stuttered Powell. “Did you know that?”

“Focus? What’s that?”

“You kept the beam directed sharply at the receiving sta-
tion—to within a ten-thousandth of a milli-second of arc”

“What receiving station?” :

“On Earth. The receiving station on Earth,” babbled Powell.
“You kept it in focus” .

Cutie turned on his heel in annoyance. “It is impossible to per-
form any act of kindness toward you two. Always the same phan-
tasm! I merely kept all dials at equilibrium in accordance with
the will of the Master” .

Gathering the scattered papers together, he withdrew stiffly,
and Donovan said, as he left, “Well, Pll be damned”

He turned to Powell. “What are we going to do now?”

Powell felt tired, but uplifted. “Nothing. He’s just shown he
can run the station perfectly. ’'ve never seen an electron storm
handled so well”

“But nothing’s solved. You heard what he said of the Master.
We can’t—”

“Look, Mike, he follows the instructions of the Master by
means of dials, instruments, and graphs. That’s all we ever fol-

1, ROBOT 65

lowed. As a matter of fact, it accounts for his refusal to obey us.
Obedience is the Second Law. No harm to humans is the first.
How can he keep humans from harm, whether he knows it or
not? Why, by keeping the energy beam stable. He knows he can
keep it more stable than we can, since he insists he’s the supe-
rior being, so he must keep us out of the control room. It’s in-
evitable if you consider the Laws of Robotics”

“Sure, but that’s not the point. We can’t let him continue this
nitwit stuff about the Master”

“Why not?”

“Because whoever heard of such a damned thing? How are we
going to trust him with the station, if he doesn’t believe in Earth?”

“Can he handle the station?”

“Yes, but—”

“Then what's the difference what he believes!”

Powell spread his arms outward with a vague smile upon his
face and tumbled backward onto the bed. He was asleep.

Powell was speaking while struggling into his lightweight space
jacket.

“Tt would be a simple job,” he said. “You can bring in new QT
models one by one, equip them with an automatic shutoff
switch to act within the week, so as to allow them enough time
to learn the ... uh... cult of the Master from the Prophet him-
self; then switch them to another station and revitalize them. We
could have two QT’s per—”

Donovan unclasped his glassite visor and scowled. “Shut up,
and let’s get out of here. Relief is waiting and I won’t feel right
until I actually see Earth and feel the ground under my feet—just
to make sure it’s really there”

The door opened as he spoke and Donovan, with a smothered
curse, clicked the visor to, and turned a sulky back upon Cutie.

The robot approached softly and there was sorrow in his
voice. “You are going?”



--- Page 38 ---
at ISAAC ASIMOV

Powell nodded curtly. “There will be others in our place”

Cutie sighed, with the sound of wind humming through
closely spaced wires. “Your term of service is over and the time
of dissolution has come. I expected it, but— Well, the Master’s
will be done!”

His tone of resignation stung Powell. “Save the sympathy,
Cutie. We’re heading for Earth, not dissolution.”

“It is best that you think so” Cutie sighed again. “I see the wis-
dom of the illusion now.I would not attempt to shake your faith,
even if I could.” He departed—the picture of commiseration.

Powell snarled and motioned to Donovan. Sealed suitcases in
hand, they headed for the air lock. .

The relief ship was on the outer landing and Franz Muller, his
relief man, greeted them with stiff courtesy. Donovan made scant
acknowledgment and passed into the pilot room to take over the
controls from Sam Evans.

Powell lingered. “How’s Earth?”

It was a conventional enough question and Muller gave the
conventional answer, “Still spinning.”

Powell said, “Good.” ;

Muller looked at him, “The boys back at the U.S. Robots have
dreamed up a new one, by the way. A multiple robot”

“A what?”

“What I said. There’s a big contract for it. It must be just the
thing for asteroid mining. You have a master robot with six sub-
robots under it. —Like your fingers.”

“Has it been field-tested?” asked Powell anxiously.

Muller smiled, “Waiting for you, I hear”

Powell’s fist balled, “Damn it, we need a vacation”

“Oh, you'll get it. Two weeks, I think.”

He was donning the heavy space gloves in preparation for his
term of duty here, and his thick eyebrows drew close together.
“How is this new robot getting along? It better be good, or I'll be
damned if I let it touch the controls”

Powell paused before answering. His eyes swept the proud

I. ROBOT 57

Prussian before him from the close-cropped hair on the sternly
stubborn head, to the feet standing stiffly at attention—and there
was a sudden glow of pure gladness surging through him.

“The robot is pretty good,” he said slowly. “I don’t think you'll
have to bother much with the controls”

He grinned—and went into the ship. Muller would be here for
several weeks—



