--- Page 1 ---
8 AN TAM Bod kK &



--- Page 2 ---
CONTENTS

Introduction

Robbie

Runaround

Reason

Catch That Rabbit
Liar!

Little Lost Robot
Escape!

Evidence

The Evitable Conflict

eo OPN NAM AYN &

25
46
68
91

112

144

170

198


--- Page 3 ---
INTRODUCTION

| looked at my notes and | didn't like them. I'd spent
three days at US. Robots and might as well have spent them at
home with the Encyclopedia Tellurica.

Susan Calvin had been born in the year 1982, they said,
which made her seventysive now. Everyone knew that. Appro-
briately enough, US. Robot and Mechanical Men, Inc., was
seventy-five also, since it had been in the year of Dr. Calvin’s
birth that Lawrence Robertson had first taken out incorpora-
tion papers for what eventually became the strangest indus-
trial giant in man’s history. Well, everyone knew that, too.

At the age of twenty, Susan Calvin bad been part of the par-
ticular Psycho-Math seminar at which Dr Alfred Lanning of
US. Robots bad demonstrated the first mobile robot to be
equipped with a voice. It was a large, clumsy unbeautiful ro-
bot, smelling of machine-oil and destined for the projected
' mines on Mercury.—But it could speak and make sense.

Susan said nothing at that seminar; took no part in the hec-
tic discussion period that followed. She was a frosty girl, plain
and colorless, who protected herself against a world she dis-
liked by a'mask-like expression and a hypertrophy of intellect.
But as she watched and listened, she felt the stirrings of a cold
enthusiasm.

She obtained her bachelor’s degree at Columbia in 2003
and began graduate work in cybernetics.

All that bad been done in the mid-twentieth century on


--- Page 4 ---
ISAAC ASIMOV

“calculating machines” had been upset by Robertson and his
positronic brain-paths. The miles of relays and pbotocells bad
given way to the spongy globe of, ‘plantinumiridium about the
size of a buman brain.

She learned to calculate the parameters necessary to fix the
possible variables within the “positronic brain”; to construct
“brains” on paper such that the responses to given stimuli
could be accurately predicted. o

In 2008, she obtained ber Ph.D, and joined United States
Robots as a “Robopsychologist, becoming the first great ‘practi-
tioner of'a new science. Lawrence Robertson was still president
of the corporation, Alfred Lanning bad become director of re-
search. ;

For fifty years, she watched the direction of buman progress
change—-and leap abead.

Now she was retiring—as much as she ever could. At least,
she was allowing someone else’s name to be inset upon the
door of her office.

That, essentially, was what I bad.I bad a long list of ber pub-
lished papers, of the patents in ber name;I had the cbronolog-
ical details of ber promotions—In short I had her professional

‘vita’ in full detail.

But that wasn’t what I wanted.

I needed more than that for my feature articles for Inter-
planetary Press. Much more. :

I told her so. :

“Dr. Calvin? I said, as lusbly as possible, “in the mind of the
public you and US. Robots are identical. Your retirement will
end an era and—”

“You want the buman-interest angle?” She didn’t smile at
me. I don’t think she ever smiles. But ber eyes were sharp,
though not angry. I felt ber glance slide through me and out
my occiput and knew that I was uncommonly transparent to
ber; that everybody was.

But I said, “That's right.”

|, ROBOT

“Human interest out of robots? A contradiction,’

“No, doctor Out of you.”

“Well, 've been called a robot myself. Sure.
I’m not human.”

They had, but there was no point in saying so.

She got up from ber chair She wasn't tall and she looked
Jrail.I followed her to the window and we looked out.

The officés and factories of US. Robots were a small city;
Spaced and planned, It was flattened out ltke an aerial photo-
graph. :

“When I first came here,’ she said, “I bad a little room in a
building right about there where the Jirebouse is now” She
pointed. It was torn down before you were born. I shared the
room with three others. I had half a desk. We built our robots
all in one butiding. Output—three a week. Now look at us.”

“Fifty years,’ I hackneyed, “is a long time.”

“Not when you're looking back at them,’ she said.“You won-
der how they vanished so quickly”

She went back to her desk and sat down. She didn’t need ex-
pression on her face to look sad, somebow.

“How old are you?” she wanted to know.

“Thirty-two, I said. :

“Then you don’t remember a world without robots. There
was a time when humanity faced the universe alone and
without a friend. Now he bas creatures to help bim; stronger
creatures than bimself, more faithful, more useful, and ab-
solutely devoted to him. Mankind is no longer alone. Have you
ever thought of it that way?”

‘T'm afraid I haven't. May I quote you?”

“You may. To you, a robot is a robot. Gears and metal; elec-
tricity and positrons.—Mind and tron! Human-made! If neces-
sary, buman-destroyed! But you baven’t worked with them, so

you don’t know them. They're a cleaner better breed than we
are”

ly, they’ve told you

I tried to nudge ber gently with words, “We'd like to bear


--- Page 5 ---
ISAAC ASIMOV

some of the things you could tell us; get your views on robots.
The Interplanetary Press reaches the entire Solar System. Po-
tential audience is three billion, Dr. Calvin. They ought to know
what you could tell them on.robots.” :

It wasn’t necessary to nudge. She didn’t bear me, but she
was moving in the right direction.

“They might bave known that from the start.We sold robots
for Earth-use then—before my time it was, even. Of course,
that wasiwhen robots could not talk. Afterward, they became
more buiman and opposition began. The labor unions, of
course, naturally opposed robot competition for human jobs,
and various segments of religious opinion bad their supersti-
tious objections. It was all quite ridiculous and quite useless.
And yet there it was.”

Iwas taking it down verbatim on my pocket-recorder, trying
not to show the knuckle-motions of my band. If you practice a
bit, you can get to the point where you can record accurately
without taking the little gadget out of your pocket.

“Take the case of Robbie,’ she said. “I never knew him. He
was dismantled the year before I joined the company—bope-
lessly out-of-date. But I saw the little girl in the museum—”

She stopped, but I didn’t say anything. I let ber eyes mist up
and her mind travel back. She had lots of time to cover.

“I heard about it later, and when they called us blasphemers
and demon-creators, I always thought of bim. Robbie was a
non-vocal robot. He couldn’t speak. He was made and sold in
1996. Those were-the days before extreme specialization, so he
was sold as a nursemaid—” .

‘As a what?”

‘As a nursemaid—”

“Ninety-eight—ninety-nine—one hundred.” Gloria withdrew
her chubby little forearm from before her eyes and stood fora mo-
ment, wrinkling her nose and blinking in the sunlight. Then, try-
ing to watch in all directions at once, she withdrew a few cautious
steps from the tree against which she Had been leaning.

She craned her neck to investigate the Possibilities of a clum
of bushes to the right and then withdrew farther to obtain a bet.
ter angle for viewing its dark recesses. The quiet was profound
except for the incessant buzzing of insects and the occasional
chirrup of some hardy bird, braving the midday sun.

; Gloria pouted, “I bet he went inside the house, and I’ve told
him a million times that that’s not fair”

‘With tiny lips pressed together tightly and a severe frown
crinkling her forehead, she moved determinedly toward the two-
story building up past the driveway.

Too late she heard the tustling sound behind her, followed by
the distinctive and rhythmic clump-clump of Robbie's metal
feet. She whirled about to see her triumphing companion

’ emerge from hiding and make for the home-tree at full speed.

Gloria shrieked in dismay. “Wait, Robbie! That wasn’t fair, Rob-
bie! You promised you wouldn’t run until I found you” Her little
feet could make no headway at all against Robbie’s giant strides
Then, within ten feet of the goal, Robbie’s pace slowed suddenly
to the merest of crawls, and Gloria, with one final burst of wild



--- Page 6 ---
2 ISAAC ASIMOV

speed, dashed pantingly past him to touch the welcome bark of
home-tree first.

Gleefully, she turned on the faithful Robbie, and with the
basest of ingratitude, rewarded him for his sacrifice by taunting

‘him cruelly for a lack of running ability. .

“Robbie can’t run” she shouted at the top ‘of her eight-year-
old voice. “I can beat him any day. I can beat him any day.” She
chanted the words in a shrill rhythm.

Robbie didn’t answer, of course—not in. words. He pan-
tomimed running instead, inching away until Gloria found her-
self running after him as he dodged her narrowly, forcing her to
veer in helpless circles, little arms outstretched and fanning at
the air,

“Robbie,” she squealed, “stand still!”—And the jaughter was
forced out of her in breathless jerks.

—Until he turned suddenly and caught her up, whirling her
round;so that for her the world fell away fora moment with a blue
emptiness beneath, and green trees stretching hungrily down-
ward toward the void. Then she was down in the grass again, lean-
ing against Robbie’s leg and still holding a hard, metal finger.

After a while, her breath returned. She pushed uselessly at her
disheveled hair in vague imitation of one of her mother’s ges-
tures and twisted to see if her dress were torn.

She slapped her hand against Robbie’s torso, “Bad boy! Tl
spank you!”

And Robbie cowered, holding his hands over his face so that
she had to add, “No, I won’t, Robbie. I won’t spank you. But any-
‘way, it’s my turn to hide now because you've got longer legs and
you promised not to run till I found you.”

Robbie nodded his head—a small parallelepiped with

rounded edges and corners attached to a similar but much larger -

parallelepiped that served as torso by means of a short, flexible
stalk—and obediently faced the tree. A thin, metal film de-
scended over his glowing eyes and from within his body came a
steady, resonant ticking.

|, ROBOT 73

“Don’t peek now—and don’t skip any numbers, warned Glo-
ria, and scurried for cover.

With unvarying regularity, seconds were ticked off, and at the
hundredth, up went the eyelids, and the glowing red of Robbie’s
eyes swept the prospect. They rested for a moment on a bit of
colorful gingham that protruded from behind a boulder. He ad-
vanced a few steps and convinced himself that it was Gloria who
squatted behind it.

Slowly, remaining always between Gloria and home-tree he
advanced on the hiding place, and when Gloria was plainly in
sight and could no longer even theorize to herself that she was
not seen, he extended one arm toward her, slapping the other
against his leg so that it rang again. Gloria emerged sulkily.

“You peeked!” she exclaimed, with gross unfairness. “Besides
I'm tired of playing hide-and-seek. 1 want a ride”

But Robbie was hurt at the unjust accusation, so he seated
cunselt carefully and shook his head ponderously from side to
side.

Gloria changed her tone to one of gentle coaxing immedi-
ately, “Come on, Robbie. I didn’t mean it about the peeking. Give
me a ride” ; .

Robbie was not to be won over so easily, though. He gazed
stubbornly at the sky, and shook his head even more emphati-
cally.

“Please, Robbie, please give me a ride” She encircled his neck
with rosy arms and hugged tightly. Then, changing moods in a
moment, she moved away. “If you don’t, ’m going to cry” and
her face twisted appallingly in preparation.

Hard-hearted Robbie paid scant attention to this dreadful pos-
sibility, and shook his head a third time. Gloria found it necessary. -
to play her trump card. .

“If you don’t?” she exclaimed warmly, “I won’t tell you any
more stories, that’s all. Not one—”

Robbie gave in immediately and unconditionally before this
ultimatum, nodding his head vigorously until the metal of his



--- Page 7 ---
4 ISAAC ASIMQV

neck hummed. Carefully, he raised the little girl and placed her
on his broad, flat shoulders.

Gloria’s threatened tears vanished immediately and she
crowed with delight. Robbie's metal skin, kept at a constant tem-
perature of seventy by the high resistance coils within, felt nice
and comfortable, while the beautifully loud sound her heels made
as they bumped rhythmically against his chest was enchanting.

“You're an air-coaster, Robbie, you're a big, silver air-coaster.
Hold out your arms straight. —You got to, Robbie, if you’re going
to be an air-coaster”

The logic was irrefutable. Robbie’s arms were wings catching .
the air currents and he was a silver ‘coaster.

Gloria twisted the robot’s head and leaned to the right. He
banked sharply. Gloria equipped the ’coaster with a motor that
went “Br-t-r” and then with weapons that went “Powie” and “Sh-
sh-shshsh” Pirates were giving chase and the ship’s blasters
were coming into play. The pirates dropped in a steady rain.

“Got another one. —~Two more,’ she cried.

Then “Faster, men,” Gloria said pompously, “we’re running out
of ammunition.” She aimed over her shoulder with undaunted
courage and Robbie was a blunt-nosed spaceship zooming
through the void at maximum acceleration.

Clear across the field he sped, to the patch of tall grass on the
other side, where he stopped with a suddenness that evoked a
shriek from his flushed rider, and then tumbled her onto the soft,
green carpet.

Gloria gasped and panted, and gave voice to intermittent
whispered exclamations of “That was nice!”

Robbie waited until she had caught her breath and then
pulled gently at a lock of hair.

“You want something?” said Gloria, eyes wide in an appar-
ently artless complexity that fooled her huge “nursemaid” not at
all. He pulled the curl harder.

“Oh, 1 know. You want a story”

Robbie nodded rapidly.

1, ROBOT 5

“Which one?” :

Robbie made a semi-circle in the air with one finger.

; The little girl protested, “Again? I’ve told you Cinderella a mil-
lion times. Aren’t you tired of it? —It’s for babies” ;

Another semi-circle.

“Oh, well,” Gloria composed herself, ran over the details of the
tale in her mind (together with her own elaborations, of which
she had several) and began:

“Are you ready? Well—once upon a time there was a beautiful
little girl whose name was Ella. And she had a terribly cruel step-
mother and two very ugly and very cruel step-sisters and—”

Gloria was reaching the very climax of the tale—midnight was
striking and everything was changing back to the shabby origi-
nals lickety-split, while Robbie listened tensely with burning
eyes—whien the interruption came. ,
“Gloria!” .
; It was the high-pitched sound of a woman who has been call-
ing not once, but several times; and had the nervous tone of one
in whom anxiety was beginning to overcome impatience. ,
Mamma’s calling me, said Gloria, not quite happily. “You'd
better carry me back to the house, Robbie”
Robbie obeyed with alacrity for somehow there was that in
him which judged it best to obey Mrs. Weston, without as much
as a scrap of hesitation. Gloria’s father was rarely home in the
daytime except on Sunday—today, for instance—and when he

_ Was, he proved a genial and understanding person. Gloria’s

mother, however, was a source of uneasiness to Robbie and there
was always the impulse to sneak away from her sight.

Mrs. Weston caught sight of them the minute they rose above
she masking tufts of long grass and retired inside the house to
wait.

“
T’ve shouted myself hoarse, Gloria,” she said, severely. “Where
were you?” ,



--- Page 8 ---
5 ISAAC ASIMOV

“I was with Robbie” quavered Gloria. “I was telling him Cin-
derella, and I forgot it was dinner-time.”
“Well, it’s a pity Robbie forgot, too.” Then, as if that reminded
her of the robot’s presence, she whirled upon him. “You may 80,
Robbie. She doesn’t need you now.’ Then, brutally, “And don’t
come back till I call you” a a
Robbie turned to go, but hesitated as’Gloria cried out in his
defense, “Wait, Mamma, you got to let him stay.I didn’t finish Cin-
derella for him. I said I would tell him Cinderella and I’m not fin-
ished.”
“Gloria!”
“Honest and truly, Mamma, he’ll stay so quiet, you won’t even
know he’s here. He can sit on the chair in the corner, and he
won't say a word,—I mean he won't do anything. Will you, Rob-
bie?? : 4
Robbie, appealed to, nodded his massive head up and own
once.
“Gloria, if you don’t stop this at once, you shan’t see Robbie
for a whole week.” a ;
The girl’s eyes fell, “All right! But Cinderella is his favorite
story and I didn’t finish it. —And he likes it so much?”
The robot left with a disconsolate step and Gloria choked
back a sob. :

George Weston was comfortable. It was a habit of his to be com-
fortable on Sunday afternoons. A good, hearty dinner below the
* hatches; a nice, soft, dilapidated couch on which to sprawl; a
; copy of the Times; slippered feet and shirtless chest;—how
could anyone belp but be comfortable?

He wasn’t pleased, therefore, when his wife walked in. After
ten years of married life, he still was so unutterably foolish as
to love her, and there was no question that he was always glad to
see her—still Sunday afternoons just after dinner were sacred to
him and his idea of solid comfort was to be left in utter solitude

7

for two or three hours. Consequently, he fixed his eye firmly
upon the latest reports of the Lefebre-Yoshida expedition to
Mars (this one was to take off from Lunar Base and might actu-
ally succeed) and pretended she wasn’t there. ;
Mrs. Weston waited patiently for two minute
tiently for two more, and finally broke the silence.
“George!”
“Hmpph?” ;
“George, I say! Will you put down that paper and look at me?”
‘The paper rustled to the floor and Weston turned a weary face
toward his wife, “What is it, dear?”
“You know what it is, George. It’s Gloria and that terrible ma-
chine.”
“What terrible machine?”
“Now don’t pretend you don’t know what I’m talking about.

It’s that robot Gloria calls Robbie. He doesn’t leave het for a nio-
ment”

s, then impa-

“Well, why should he? He’s not supposed to. And he certainly
isn’t a terrible machine. He’s the best darn robot money can buy
and I’m damned sure he set me back half a year’s income. He’s
worth it, though—darn sight cleverer than half my office staff”

He made a move to pick up the paper again, but his wife was
quicker and snatched it away.

“You listen to me, George. I won’t have my daughter en-
trusted to a machine—and I don’t care how clever it is. It has no
soul, and no one knows what it may be thinking. A child just isn’t
made to be guarded by a thing of metal”

- Weston frowned, “When did you decide this? He’s been with
Gloria two years now and I haven’t seen you worry till now”

“It was different at first. It was a novelty; it took a load off me,
and—and it was a fashionable thing to do. But now I don’t know.
The neighbors—” ,

“Well, what have the neighbors to do with it. Now, look. A ro-
bot is infinitely more to be trusted than a human nursemaid.
Robbie was constructed for only one purpose really—to be the



--- Page 9 ---
8 . ISAAC ASIMOV

companion of a little child. His entire ‘mentality’ has been cre-
ated for the purpose. He just can’t help being faithful and loving
and kind. He’s a machine—made so. That’s more than you can
say for humans”

“But something might go wrong. Some—some—” Mrs: We-
ston was a bit hazy about the insides of a robot, “some little jig-
ger will come loose and the awful thing will go berserk
and—and—” She couldn’t bring herself to complete the quite
obvious thought.

“Nonsense” Weston denied, with an involuntary nervous ©

shiver. “That’s completely ridiculous. We had a long discussion at
the time we bought Robbie about the First Law of Robotics. You
know that it is impossible for a robot to harm a human being;
that long before enough can go wrong to alter that First Law, a
robot would be completely inoperable. It’s a mathematical im-
possibility. Besides I have an engineer from U.S. Robots. here
twice a year to give the poor gadget a complete overhaul. Why,
there’s no more chance of anything at all going wrong with Rob-
bie than there is of you or I suddenly going looney—consider-
ably less, in fact. Besides, how are you going to take him away
from Gloria?”

He made another futile stab at the paper and his wife tossed it
angrily into the next room.

“That's just it, George! She won’t play with anyone else. There
are dozens of little boys and girls that she should make friends
with, but she won’t. She won’t go near them unless I make her.
That’s no way for a little girl to grow up. You want her to be nor-
mal, don’t you? You want her to be able to take her part in soci-

“You're jumping at shadows, Grace. Pretend Robbie’s a dog.
T’ve seen hundreds of children who would rather have their dog
than their father” ; ;

“A dog is different, George. We must get rid of that horrible
thing. You can sell it back to the company. Ive asked, and you
can”

9g

aan asked? Now look here, Grace, let’s not go off the deep
end. We're keeping the robot until Gloria is older and I don’t

want the subject brought 4 in.” i
ip again” And
out of the room in a huff. nea tha De walked

en met her husband at the door two evenings later.
ou'll have to listen to thi . ing i
village? this, George. There’s bad feeling in the
‘About what?” asked Weston. He stepped into the washroom
and drowned out any possible answer by the splash of water.
Mrs. Weston waited. She said, “About Robbie” ,
Weston stepped out, towel in h: :
; and, face red and “
are you talking about?” snare Nat
Oh, it’s been building up and building up. I’ve tried to close
my eyes to it, but I’m not going to any more. Most of the villagers
consider Robbie dangerous. Children aren’t allowed to go ne
our place in the evenings” ~ ° “
“We trust our child with the thing”
“Well, people aren’t reasonable about these things.” -
“Then to hell with them”

Saying that doesn’t solve the problem. I’ve got to do my shop-
ping down there. I've got to meet them every day. And it’s even
Ie ja in the ay these days when it comes to robots. New York

just passed an ordinance keeping all robots off
tween sunset and sunrise.” oemmne sircets be
he ‘All right, but they can’t stop us from keeping a robot in our
ane —Grace, this is one of your campaigns. I recognize it. But
it’s no use. The answer is still no! We're keeping Robbie!”

And yet he loved his wife—and what was worse his wife kn
it. George Weston, after all was only a man—poor thing —and his
wife made full use of every device which a clumsier and mor
scrupulous sex has learned, with reason and futility, to fear. :



--- Page 10 ---
10 ISAAC ASIMOV
Ten tiines in the ensuing week, he cried, “Robbie stays,—and
that’s final! » and each time it was weaker and accompanied by a
louder and more agonized groan.
Came the day at last, when Weston approached his daughter
guiltily and suggested a “beautiful” visivox show in the village.
Gloria! clapped her hands happily, “Can Robbie go?”
“No, dear” he said, and winced at the sound of his voice, “they
won’t allow robots at the visivox—but you can tell him all about
it when you get home.” He stumbled all over the last few words
and looked away. ;
Gloria came back from town bubbling over with enthusiasm,
for the visivox had been a gorgeous spectacle indeed.
She waited for her father to maneuver the jet-car into the
sunken garage, “Wait till I tell Robbie, Daddy. He would have.
liked it like anything. —Especially when Francis Fran was back-
ing away so-o-0 quietly, and backed right into one of the Leopard-
Men and had to run.” She laughed again, “Daddy, are there really
Leopard-Men on the Moon?”
“Probably not, said Weston absently. “It’s just funny make-
believe” He couldn’t take much longer with the car. He’d have to
face it.
Gloria ran across the lawn. “Robbie. —Robbie!”
Then she stopped suddenly at the sight of a beautiful collie
which regarded her out of serious brown eyes as it wagged its
tail on the porch.
“Oh, what a nice dog!” Gloria climbed the steps, approached
cautiously and patted it. “Is it for me, Daddy?”
Her mother had joined them. “Yes, it is, Gloria. Isn’t it nice—
soft and furry. It’s very gentle. It /ikes little girls”
“Can he play games?”
“Surely. He can do any number of tricks. Would you like to see
some?”

“Right away. I want Robbie to see him, too. —Robbiel She
stopped, uncertainly, and frowned, “I'll bet he’s just staying in his
room because he’s mad at me for not taking him to the visivox.

|, ROBOT |

You'll have to explain to him, Daddy. He might not believe me,
but he knows if you say it, it’s so”

, Weston’s lips grew tighter. He looked toward his wife but
could not catch her eye. :

Gloria turned precipitously and ran down the basement steps,
shouting as she went, “Robbie— Come and see what Daddy and
Mamma brought me. They brought me a dog, Robbie”

In a minute she had returned, a frightened little girl. “Mamma,
Robbie isn’t in his room. Where is he?” There was no answer and
Georgé Weston coughed and was suddenly extremely interested
in an aimlessly drifting cloud. Gloria’s voice quavered on the
verge of tears, “Where’s Robbie, Mamma?”

Mrs. Weston sat down and drew her daughter gently to her,
“Don’t feel bad, Gloria. Robbie has gone away, ! think”

“Gone away? Where? Where’s he gone away, Mamma?”

“No one knows, darling. He just walked away.We’ve looked and
we've looked and we’ve looked for him, but we can’t find him”

“You mean he'll never come back again?” Her eyes were
round with horror.

“We may find him soon. We'll keep looking for him. And mean-
while you can play with your nice new doggie. Look at him! His
name is Lightning and he can—”

But Gloria’s eyelids had overflown, “I don’t want the nasty
dog—I want Robbie. I want you to find me Robbie” Her feelings
became too deep for words, and she spluttered into a shrill wail.

Mrs. Weston glanced at her husband for help, but he merely
shuffled his feet morosely and did not withdraw his ardent. stare
from the heavens, so she bent to the task of consolation, “Why
do you cry, Gloria? Robbie was only a machine, just a nasty old
machine. He wasn’t alive at all”

“He was not no machine!” screamed Gloria, fiercely and un-
grammatically. “He was a person just like you and me and he was

_ my friend.1 want him back. Oh, Mamma, want him back?”

Her mother groaned in defeat and left Gloria to her sorrow.
“Let her have her cry out, she told her husband. “Childish



--- Page 11 ---
12 ISAAC ASIMOV

griefs are never lasting. In a few days, she’ll forget that awful £0-
bot ever existed.”

But time proved Mrs. Weston a bit too optimistic. To be sure,
Gloria ceased crying, but she ceased smiling, too, and the passing
days found her ever more silent and shadowy. Gradually, her atti-
tude of passive unhappiness wore Mrs. Weston down and all that
kept her from yielding was the impossibility of admitting defeat
to her husband. ;

Then, one evening, she flounced into the living room, sat
down, folded her arms and looked boiling mad.

Her husband stretched his neck in order to see her over his
newspaper, “What now, Grace?”

“It’s that child, George. I’ve had to send back the dog today.
Gloria positively couldn’t stand the sight of him, she said. She’s
driving me into a nervous breakdown.”

Weston laid down the paper and a hopeful gleam entered his
eye, “Maybe— Maybe we ought to get Robbie back. It might be
done, you know. I can get in touch with—”

“No!” she replied, grimly. “I won’t hear of it. We're not giving
up that easily. My child shall not be brought up by a robot if it
takes years to break her of it.”

Weston picked up his paper again with a disappointed air. “A
year of this will have me prematurely gray.”

“You're a big help, George,’ was the frigid answer. “What Glo-

" tia needs is a change of environment. Of course she can’t forget

Robbie here. How can she when every tree and rock reminds
her of him? It is really the silliest situation I have ever heard of.
Imagine a child pining away for the loss of a robot”

“Well, stick to the point. What’s the change in environment
you're planning?”

“We're going to take her to New York.”

“The city! In August! Say, do you know what New York is like
in August? It’s unbearable.”

“Millions do bear it.”

1, ROBOT 13

“They don’t have a place like this to go to. If they didn’t have
to stay in New York, they wouldn’t”

“Well, we have to.I say we’re leaving now—or as soon as we
can make the arrangements. In the city, Gloria will find sufficient
interests and sufficient friends to Perk her up and make her for-
get that machine”

“Oh, Lord” groaned the lesser half, “those frying pavements!”

“We have to,” was the unshaken response. “Gloria has lost five
pounds in the last month and my little girl’s health is more im-
portant to me than your comfort”

“It’s a pity you didn’t think of your little girl’s health before
you deprived her of her pet robot? he muttered—but to him-
self.

Gloria displayed immediate signs of improvement when told of
the impending trip to the city. She spoke little of it, but when she
did, it was always with lively anticipation. Again, she began to
smile and to eat with something of her former appetite.

Mrs. Weston hugged herself for joy and lost no opportunity to
triumph over her still skeptical husband.

“You see, George, she helps with the packing like a little angel,
and chatters away as if she hadn’t a care in the world. It’s just as
I told you—all we need do is substitute other interests”

“Hmpph,” was the skeptical response, “I hope so”

Preliminaries were gone through quickly. Arrangements were
made for the preparation of their city home and a couple were
engaged as housekeepers for the country home.When the day of
the trip finally did come, Gloria was all but her old self again, and

no mention of Robbie passed her lips at all.

In high good humor the family took a taxi- -gyro to the airport
(Weston would have preferred using his own private ’gyro, but it

was only a two-seater with no room for baggage) and entered
the waiting liner.



--- Page 12 ---
14 ISAAC ASIMOV

“Come, Gloria, called Mrs. Weston. “I’ve saved you a seat near
the window so you can ‘watch the scenery.”

Gloria trotted down the aisle cheerily, flattened her nose into
a white oval against the thick clear glass, and watched with an in-
tentness that increased as the sudden coughing of the motor
drifted backward into the interior. She was too young to be
frightened when the ground dropped away as if let through a
trap-door and she herself suddenly became twice her usual
weight, but not too young to be mightily interested. It wasn’t un-
til the ground had changed into a tiny patch-work quilt that she
withdrew her nose, and faced her mother again.

“Will we soon be in the city, Mamma?” she asked, rubbing her

chilled nose, and watching with interest as the patch of moisture’

which her breath had formed on the pane shrank slowly and
vanished.

“In about half an hour, dear” Then, with just the faintest trace
of anxiety, “Aren’t you glad we’re going? Don’t you think you'll
be very happy in the city with all the buildings and people and
things to see? We'll go to the visivox every day and see shows
and go to the circus and the beach and—”

“Yes, Mamma,” was Gloria’s unenthusiastic rejoinder. The liner
passed over a bank of clouds at the moment, and Gloria was in-

stantly absorbed in the usual spectacle of clouds underneath -

one. Then they were over clear sky again, and she turned to her
mother with a sudden mysterious air of secret knowledge.

“I know why we're going to the city, Mamma.”

“Do you?” Mrs. Weston was puzzled. “Why, dear?” .

“You didn’t tell me because you wanted it to be a surprise, but
I know” For a moment, she was lost in admiration at her own
acute penetration, and then she laughed gaily. “We're going to
New York so we can find Robbie, aren’t we? —With detectives”

The statement caught George Weston in the middle of a drink
of water, with disastrous results. There was a sort of strangled
gasp, a geyser of water, and then a bout of choking coughs. When

|, ROBOT 15

all was over, he stood there, a red-faced, water-drenched and
very, very annoyed person.

Mrs. Weston maintained her composure, but when Gloria re-
peated her question in a more anxious tone of voice, she found
her temper rather bent.

“Maybe,” she retorted, tartly. “Now sit and be still, for Heaven’s
sake.”

New York City, 1998 A.D., was a paradise for the sightseer more
than ever in its history. Gloria’s parents realized this and made
the most of it.

On direct orders from his wife, George Weston arranged to
have his business take care of itself for a month or so, in order to
be free to spend the time in what he termed “dissipating Gloria
to the verge of ruin” Like everything else Weston did, this was
gone about in an efficient, thorough, and business-like way. Be-
fore the month had passed, nothing that could be done had not
been done. ;

She was taken to the top of the half-mile tall Roosevelt Building,
to gaze down in awe upon the jagged panorama of rooftops that
blended far off in the fields of Long Island and the flatlands of New
Jersey. They visited the zoos where Gloria stared in delicious
fright at the “real live lion” (rather disappointed that the keepers
fed him raw steaks, instead of human beings,as she had expected),
and asked insistently and peremptorily to see “the whale”

The various museums came in for their share of attention, to-
gether with the parks and the beaches and the aquarium.

She was taken halfway up the Hudson in an excursion
steamer fitted out in the archaism of the mad ‘Twenties. She trav-

elled into the stratosphere on an exhibition trip, where the sky

turned deep purple and the stars came out and the misty earth
below looked like a huge concave bowl. Down under the waters
of the Long Island Sound she was taken ina glass-walled subsea



--- Page 13 ---
16 ISAAC ASIMOV

vessel, where in a green and wavering world, quaint and curious
sea-things ogled her and wiggled suddenly away.

On a more prosaic level, Mrs. Weston took her to the depart-
ment stores where she could revel in another type of fairyland.

In fact, when the month had nearly sped, the Westons were
convinced that everything conceivable had been done to take
Gloria’s mind once and for all off the departed Robbie—but they

were not quite sure they had succeeded. a

The fact remained that wherever Gloria went, she displayed the
most absorbed and concentrated interest in such robots as hap-
pened to be present. No matter how exciting the spectacle before
her, nor how novel to her girlish eyes, she turned away instantly if
the corner of her eye caught a glimpse of metallic movement.

Mrs. Weston went out of her way to keep Gloria away from all
robots.

And the matter was finally climaxed in the episode at the Mu-
seum of: Science and Industry. The Museum had announced a
special “children’s program” in which exhibits of scientific
witchery scaled down to the child mind were to be shown. The
Westons, of course, placed it upon their list of “absolutely”

It was while the Westons were standing totally absorbed in
the exploits of a powerful electro-magnet that Mrs. Weston sud-
denly became aware of the fact that Gloria was no longer with
her. Initial panic gave way to calm decision and, enlisting the aid
of three attendants, a careful search was begun.

Gloria, of course, was not one to wander aimlessly, however.
For her age, she was an unusually. determined and purposeful
girl, quite full of the maternal genes in that respect. She had seen
a huge sign on the third floor, which had said, “This Way to the
Talking Robot?” Having spelled it out to herself and having no-
ticed that her parents did not seem to wish to move in the
proper direction, she did the obvious thing. Waiting for an Op-
portune moment of parental distraction, she calmly disengaged
herself and followed the sign.

1. ROBOT 17

The Talking Robot was a tour de force, a thoroughly impractical
device, possessing publicity value only. Once an hour, ani es- -
corted group stood before it and asked questions of the robot

- engineer in charge in careful whispers. Those the engineer de-
cided were suitable for the robot's circuits were transmitted to
the Talking Robot. ,

It was rather dull. It may be nice to know that the Square of
fourteen is one hundred ninety-six, that the temperature at the
moment is 72 degrees Fahrenheit, and the air pressure 30:02
inches of mercury, that the atomic weight of sodium is 23, but
one doesn’t really need a robot for that. One especially does not
need an unwieldy, totally immobile mass of wires and coils
Spreading over twenty-five Square yards. a

Few people bothered to return for a second helping, but one
girl in her middle teens sat quietly on a bench waiting for a third.
She was the only one in the room when Gloria entered,

Gloria did not look at her. To her at the moment, another hu-
man being was but an inconsiderable item. She saved her atten-
tion for this large thing with the wheels. For a moment, she
hesitated in dismay. It didn’t look like any robot she had ever
seen.

Cautiously and doubtfully she raised her treble voice, “Please
Mr Robot, sir, are you the Talking Robot, sir?” She wasn’t sure, but
it seemed to her that a robot that actually talked was worth a
great deal of politeness. : :

(The girl in her mid-teens allowed a look of intense concen-
tration to cross her thin, plain face. She whipped out a small
notebook and began writing in rapid pothooks.)

There was an oily whir of gears and a mechanically timbered
voice boomed out in words that lacked accent and intonation,
“I—am—the—robot—that—talks”

Gloria stared at it ruefully. It did talk, but the sound came from



--- Page 14 ---
18 ISAAC ASIMOV

inside somewheres. There was no face to talk to. She said, “Can
you help me, Mr. Robot, sir?”

The Talking Robot was designed to answer questions, and
only such questions as it could answer had ever been put to it. It
was quite confident of its ability, therefore, “I—can—help—.
you.”

“Thank you, Mr. Robot, sir. Have you seen Robbie?”

“Who—is Robbie?”

“He’s a robot, Mr. Robot, sir’? She stretched to tiptoes. “He’s
about so high, Mr. Robot, sir, only higher, and he’s very nice. He’s
got a head, you know. I mean you haven't, but he has, Mr. Robot,
sir”

The Talking Robot had been left behind, “A-—robot?”
“Yes, Mr. Robot, sir. A robot just like you, except he can’t talk,
of course, and—looks like a real person.”

“A—robot—like—me?”

“Yes, Mr. Robot, sir”

To which the Talking Robot’s only response was an erratic
splutter and an occasional incoherent sound. The radical gener-
alization offered it, i.e., its existence, not as a particular object,
but as a member of a general group, was too much for it. Loyally,
it tried to encompass the concept and half a dozen coils burnt
out. Little warning signals were buzzing.

(The girl in her mid-teens left at that point. She had enough
for her Physics-1 paper on “Practical Aspects of Robotics.’ This
paper was Susan Calvin’s first of many on the subject.)

Gloria stood waiting, with carefully concealed impatience, for
the machine’s answer when she heard the cry behind her of
“There she is” and recognized that cry as her mother’s.

“What are you doing here, you bad girl?” cried Mrs. Weston,
anxiety dissolving at once into anger. “Do you know you fright-
ened your mamma and daddy almost to death? Why did you run
away?”

The robot engineer had also dashed in, tearing his hair, and de-
manding who of the gathering crowd had tampered with the

|, ROBOT 19

machine. “Can’t anybody read signs?” he yelled. “You’re not al-

lowed in here without an attendant”

Gloria raised her grieved voice over the din, “I only came to see
the Talking Robot, Mamma. I thought he might know where Rob-

’ bie was because they're both robots.” And then, as the thought of
Robbie was suddenly brought forcefully home to her, she burst into
a sudden storm of tears, “And I gotto find Robbie, Mamma. I got to”

Mrs. Weston strangled a cry, and said, “Oh, good Heavens.
Come home, George. This is more than I can stand.”

‘That evening, George Weston left for several hours, and the
next morning, he approached his wife with something that
looked suspiciously like smug complacence.

“T’ve got an idea, Grace”

“About what?” was the gloomy, uninterested query.

“About Gloria”

“You're not going to suggest buying back that robot?”
“No, of course not”

“Then go ahead. I might as well listen to you. Nothing I’ve
done seems to have done any good”

“All right. Here’s what I’ve been thinking. The whole trouble
with Gloria is that she thinks of Robbie as a person and not as a

. machine. Naturally, she can’t forget him. Now if we managed to

convince her that Robbie was nothing more than a mess of steel
and copper in the form of sheets and wires with electricity its
juice of life, how long would her longings last? It’s the psycho-
logical attack, if you see my point.”

“How do you plan to do it?”

“Simple. Where do you suppose I went last night? I persuaded
Robertson of U.S. Robot and Mechanical Men, Inc.,to arrange for
a complete tour of his premises tomorrow. The three of us will
go, and by the time we're through, Gloria will have it drilled into
her that a robot is not alive”

Mrs. Weston’s eyes widened gradually and something glinted

in her eyes that was quite like sudden admiration, “Why, George,
that’s a good idea”



--- Page 15 ---
eo ISAAE ASIMOV

And George Weston’s vest buttons strained. “Only kind I
have,” he said.

Mx. Struthers was a conscientious General Manager and naturally
inclined to be a bit talkative. The. combination, therefore, re-
sulted in a tour that was fully explained, perhaps even over-
abundantly explained, at every step. However, Mrs. Weston was
not bored. Indeed, she stopped him several times and begged
him to repeat his statements in simpler language so that Gloria
might understand. Under the influence of this appreciation of
his narrative powers, Mr. Struthers expanded genially and be-
came ever more communicative, if possible.

George Weston, himself, showed a gathering impatience.

“Pardon me, Struthers,” he said, breaking into the middle of a
lecture on the photo-electric cell, “haven’t you a section of the
factory where only robot labor is employed?” 7

“Eh? Oh, yes! Yes, indeed!” He smiled at Mrs. Weston. “A vi-
cious ‘circle in a way, robots creating more robots. Of course, we
are not making a general practice out of it. For one thing, the
unions would never let us. But we can turn out a very few robots
using robot labor exclusively, merely as a sort of scientific exper-
iment. You see,’ he tapped his pince-nez into one palm argumen-
tatively, “what the labor unions don’t realize—and I say this as a
man who has always been very sympathetic with the labor
movement in general—is that the advent of the robot, while in-
volving some dislocation to begin with, will inevitably—”

“Yes, Struthers,” said Weston, “but about that section of the
factory you speak of—may we see it? It would be very interest-
ing, I’m sure”

“Yes! Yes, of course!” Mr. Struthers replaced his pince-nez in
one convulsive movement and gave vent to a soft cough of dis-
comfiture. “Follow me, please”

He was comparatively quiet while leading the three through a
long corridor and down a flight of stairs. Then, when they had

Il, ROBOT road |

entered a large welltit room that buzzed with metallic activity,
the sluices opened and the flood of explanation poured forth
again.

“There you are!” he said with pride in his voice. “Robots only!
Five men act as overseers and they don’t even stay in this room.
In five years, that is, since we began this project, not a single ac-
cident has, occurred. Of course, the robots here assembled are
comparatively simple, but . . ”

The General Managet’s voice had long died to a rather sooth-
ing murmur in Gloria’s ears. The whole trip seemed rather dull
and pointless to her, though there were mnany robots in sight.
None were even remotely like Robbie, though, and she surveyed

: _ them with open contempt.

In this room, there weren't any people at all, she noticed.
Then her eyes fell upon six or seven robots busily engaged at a
round table halfway across the room. They widened in incredu-
lous surprise. It was a big room. She couldn’t see for sure, but
one of the robots looked like—looked like—it wast

“Robbie!” Her shriek pierced the air, and one of the robots
about the table faltered and dropped the tool he was holding.
Gloria went almost mad with joy. Squeezing through the railing
before either parent could stop her, she dropped lightly to the
floor a few feet below, and ran toward her Robbie, arms waving
and hair flying. ;

And the three horrified adults, as they stood frozen in their
tracks, saw what the excited little girl did not see,—a huge, lum-
bering tractor bearing blindly down upon its appointed track.

It took split-seconds for Weston to come to his senses, and
those split-seconds meant everything, for Gloria could not be
overtaken. Although Weston vaulted the tailing in a wild at-

-tempt, it was obviously hopeless. Mr. Struthers signalled wildly to

the overseers to stop the tractor, but the overseers were only hu-
man and it took time to act.

It was only Robbie that acted immediately and with precision.
With metal legs eating up the space between himself and his



--- Page 16 ---
ee ISAAC ASIMQV

little mistress he charged down from the opposite direction.
Everything then happened at once. With one sweep of an arm,
Robbie snatched up Gloria, slackening his speed not one iota,
and, consequently, knocking every breath of air out of her.
Weston, not quite comprehending all that was happening, felt,
rather than saw, Robbie brush past him, and came to a sudden be-
wildered halt. The tractor intersected Gloria’s path half a second
after Robbie had, rolled on ten feet further and came to a grind-
ing, long drawn-out stop.

Gloria regained her breath, submitted to a series of passionate
hugs on the part of both her parents and turned eagerly toward
Robbie. As far as she was concerned, nothing had happened ex-
cept that she had found her friend. : ‘

But Mrs. Weston’s expression had changed from one of relief
to one of dark suspicion. She turned to her husband, and, despite
her disheveled and undignified appearance, managed to look
quite formidable, “You engineered this, didn’t you?”

George Weston swabbed at a hot forehead with his handker-
chief. His hand was unsteady, and his lips could curve only into a
tremulous and exceedingly weak smile.

Mrs. Weston pursued the thought, “Robbie wasn’t designed
for engineering or construction work. He couldn’t be of any use
to them. You had him placed there deliberately so that Gloria
would find him. You know you did”

“Well, I did? said Weston. “But, Grace, how was I to know the
reunion would be so violent? And Robbie has saved her life;
you'll have to admit that. You can’t send him away again”

Grace Weston considered. She turned toward Gloria and Rob-
bie and watched them abstractedly for a moment. Gloria had a
grip about the robot’s neck that would have asphyxiated any
creature but one of metal, and was prattling nonsense in half-
hysterical frenzy. Robbie’s chrome-steel arms (capable of bend-
ing a bar of steel two inches in diameter into a pretzel) wound
about the little girl gently and lovingly, and his eyes glowed a
deep, deep red.

|, ROBOT e3

“Well,” said Mrs. Weston, at last, “I guess he can stay with us un-
til he rusts”

Susan Calvin shrugged ber shoulders, “Of course, he didn’t
That was 1998. By 2002, we had invented the mobile speaking
robot which, of course, made all the non-speaking models out

of date, and which seemed to be the Jinal straw as far as the
non-robot elements were concerned. Most of the world govern-
ments banned robot use on Earth Jor any purpose other than
Scientific research between 2003 and 2007”

“So that Gloria had to give up Robbie eventually?”

‘T'm afraid so.I imagine, however, that it was easier Sor her
at the age of fifteen than at eight. Still, it was a stupid and un-
necessary attitude on the part of humanity US. Robots bit its
low point, Jinancially, just about the time I joined them in
2007. At first, I thought my job might come to a sudden end in
@ matter of months, but then we simply developed the extra-
Terrestrial market”

‘And then you were set, of course.” .

“Not quite. We began by trying to adapt the models we bad
on band. Those first speaking models, for instance. They were

about twelve feet high, very clumsy and not mich good. We
sent them out to Mercury to help build the mining station
there, but that failed”

I looked up in surprise, “It did? Why, Mercury Mines is a
multi-billion dollar concern”

“It ts now, but it was a second attempt that succeeded. If you
want to know about that, young man, Id advise you to look
up Gregory Powell. He and Michael Donovan handled our
most difficult cases in the teens and twenties. I haven't beard
Jrom Donovan in years, but Powell is living right bere in New
York. He’s a grandfather now, which is a thought difficult to get
used to. I can only think of him as a rather young man. Of
course, I was younger, too.”



--- Page 17 ---
24 ISAAC ASIMOV

I tried to keep ber talking, “If you would give me the bare
bones, Dr. Calvin, I can have Mr. Powell fill it in afterward.
is was exactly what I later did.)
Ope spread ber thin bands out upon the desk and looked at
them. “There are two or three,’ she said, “that I know a little
about.’ ;

‘Start with Mercury,’ I suggested.

“Well, I think it was in 2015 that the Second Mercury Expe-
dition was sent out. It was exploratory and financed in part by
US. Robots and in part by Solar Minerals. It consisted of a new-
type robot, still experimental; Gregory Powell; Michael Dono-

-van—”

It was one of Gregory Powell's favorite Blatitudes that
nothing was to be gained from excitement, so when Mike Dono-
van came leaping down the stairs toward him, red hair matted
with perspiration, Powell frowned.

“What’s wrong?” he said. “Break a fingernail?”

“Yaaaah,’ snarled Donovan, feverishly. “What have you been
doing in the sublevels all day?” He took a deep breath and
blurted out, “Speedy never returned.” .

Powell’s eyes widened momentarily and he stopped on the
Stairs; then he recovered and resumed his upward steps. He
didn’t speak until he reached the head of the flight, and then:

“You sent him after the selenium?”

“Yes”

“And how long has he been out?”

“Five hours now”

Silence! This-was a devil of a Situation. Here they were, on
Mercury exactly twelve hours—and already up to the eyebrows
in the worst sort of trouble. Mercury had long been the jinx
world of the System, but this was ‘drawing it rather strong—even.
for a jinx.

Powell said, “Start at the beginning, and let’s get this straight.”

They were in the radio room now—with its already subtly an-
tiquated equipment, untouched for the ten years previous to
their arrival. Even ten years, technologically speaking, meant so
much. Compare Speedy with the type of robot they must have



--- Page 18 ---
26 ISAAC ASIMOV

had back in 2005. But then, advances in robotics these days were
tremendous. Powell touched a still gleaming metal surface gin-
gerly. The air of disuse that touched everything about the
room—and the entire Station—was infinitely depressing.

Donovan must have felt it. He began: “I tried to locate him by
radio, but it was no go. Radio isn’t any good on the Mercury Sun-
side—not past two miles, anyway. That’s one of the reasons the
First Expedition failed. And we can’t put up the ultrawave equip-
ment for weeks yet—”

“Skip all that.What did you get?”

“I located the unorganized body signal in the short wave. It
was no good for anything except his position. kept track of him
that way for two hours and plotted the results on the map.”

There was a yellowed square of parchment in his hip
pocket—a relic of the unsuccessful First Expedition—and he
slapped it down on the desk with vicious force, spreading it flat
with the palm of his hand. Powell, hands clasped across his
chest, watched it at long range.

Donovan’s pencil pointed nervously. “The red cross is the se-
lenium pool. You marked it yourself” .

“Which one is it?” interrupted Powell. “There were three that
MacDougal located for us before he left”

“I sent Speedy to the nearest, naturally. Seventeen miles away.
But what difference does that make?” There was tension in his
voice. “There are the penciled dots that mark Speedy’s position.”

’ And for the first time Powell’s artificial aplomb was shaken
and his hands shot forward for the map.

“Are you serious? This is impossible.”

“There it is,” growled Donovan.

The little dots that marked the position formed a rough circle
about the red cross of the selenium pool. And Powell’s fingers
went to his brown mustache, the unfailing signal of anxiety.

Donovan added: “In the two hours I checked on him, he cir-
cled that damned pool four times. It seems likely to me that he’!
keep that up forever. Do you realize the position we're in?”

|. ROBOT 27

Powell looked up shortly, and said nothing. Oh, yes, he realized
the position they were in. It worked itself out as simply as a syl-
logism. The photo-cell banks that alone stood between the full
power of Mercury’s monstrous sun and themselves were shot to

- hell. The only thing that could save them was selenium. The only

thing that could get the selenium was Speedy. If Speedy didn’t
come back, no selenium. No selenium, no photo-cell banks. No
photo-banks—well, death by slow broiling is one of the more un-
pleasant ways of being done in.

Donovan rubbed his red mop of hair savagely and expressed
himself with bitterness. “We'll be the laughingstock of the Sys-
tem, Greg. How can everything have gone so wrong so soon?
The great team of Powell and Donovan is sent out to Mercury to
report on the advisability of reopening the Sunside Mining Sta-
tion with modern techniques and robots and we ruin everything
the first day. A purely routine job, too. We'll never live it down”

“We won't have to, perhaps” replied Powell, quietly. “If we
don’t do something quickly, living anything down—or even just
plain living—will be out of the question.”

“Don’t be stupid! If you feel funny about it, Greg, I don’t. It
was criminal, sending us out here with only one robot. And it
was your bright idea that we could handle the photo-cell banks
ourselves.”

“Now you're being unfair. It was a mutual decision and you
know it. All we needed was a kilogram of selenium, a Stillhead
Dielectrode Plate and about three hours’ time—and there are
pools of pure selenium all over Sunside. MacDougal’s spectrore-
flector spotted three for us in five minutes, didn’t it? What the
devil! We couldn’t have waited for next conjunction.”

“Well, what are we going to do? Powell, you’ve got an idea. I
know you have, or you wouldn’t be so calm. You're no more a
hero than I am. Go on, spill it!” ,

“We can’t go after Speedy ourselves, Mike—not on the Sun-

‘side. Even the new insosuits aren’t good for more than twenty

minutes in direct sunlight. But you know the old saying, ‘Set a



--- Page 19 ---
2B ISAAC ASIMOV

robot to catch a robot? Look, Mike, maybe things aren’t so bad.
We've got six robots down in the sublevels, that we may be able
to use, if they work. Jf they work.” ;

There was a glint of sudden hope in Donovan’s eyes. “You
mean six robots from the First Expedition. Are you sure? They
may:be subrobotic machines. Ten years is a long time as far as
robot-types are concerned, you know?

“No, they're robots. I’ve spent all day with them and I know.
They’ve got positronic brains: primitive, of course.” He placed
the map in his pocket. “Let’s go down.”

The robots were on the lowest sublevel—all six of them sur-
rounded by musty packing cases of uncertain content. They
were large, extremely so, and even though they were in a sitting
position on the floor, legs straddled out before them, their heads
were a good seven feet in the air.

Donovan whistled. “Look at the size of them, will you? The
chests must be ten feet around.”

“That’s because they’re supplied with the old McGuffy gears.
I’ve been over the insides—crummiest set you've ever seen.”

' “Have you powered them yet?”

’ “No. There wasn’t any reason to.1 don’t think there’s anything
‘wrong with them. Even the diaphragm is in reasonable order.
They might talk” :

He had unscrewed the chest plate of the nearest as he spoke, in-
serted the two-inch sphere that contained the tiny spark of atomic
energy that was a robot's life. There was difficulty in fitting it, but
he managed, and then screwed the plate back on again in labori-
ous fashion. The radio controls of more modern models had not
been heard of ten years earlier. And then to the other five.

Donovan said uneasily, “They haven’t moved.”

“No orders to do so? replied Powell, succinctly. He went back
to the first in the line and struck him on the chest. “You! Do you
hear me?”

[, ROBOT eg

The monster’s head bent slowly and the eyes fixed them-
selves on Powell. Then, in a harsh, squawking voice—like that of
a medieval phonograph—he grated, “Yes, Master!”

Powell grinned humorlessly at Donovan. “Did you get that?
Those were the days of the first talking robots when it looked as
if the use of robots on Earth would be banned. The makers were
fighting that and they built good, healthy slave complexes into
the damned machines”

“It didn’t help them,’ muttered Donovan.

“No, it didn’t, but they sure tried” He turned once more to the
robot. “Get up!”

The robot towered upward slowly and Donovan’s head
craned and his puckered lips whistled.

Powell said: “Can you go out upon the surface? In the light?”
There was consideration while the robot’s slow brain worked.
Then, “Yes, Master” .

“Good, Do you know what a mile is?”

Another consideration, and another slow answer. “Yes

Master”
“We will take you up to the surface then, and indicate a direc-

tion. You will go about seventeen miles, and somewhere in that

general region you will meet another robot, smaller than your-
self-You understand so far?”

“Yes, Master.” -

“You will find this robot and order him to return. If he does
not wish to, you are to bring him back by force”

Donovan clutched at Powell’s sleeve. “Why not send him for
the selenium direct?” ; ,

“Because I want Speedy back, nitwit.I want to find out what’s
wrong with him.” And to the robot, “All right, you, follow me”

The robot remained motionless and his voice rumbled: “Par-
don, Master, but I cannot. You must mount first” His clumsy arms
had come together with a thwack, blunt fingers interlacing.

Powell stared and then pinched at his mustache. “Uh... oh!”

Donovan’s eyes bulged. “We've got to ride him? Like a horse?”



--- Page 20 ---
30 ISAAC ASIMOV

“I guess that’s the idea.I don’t know why, though. I can’t see—
‘Yes, I do. I told you they were playing up robot-safety in those
days. Evidently, they were going to sell the notion of safety by not
allowing them to move about, without a mahout on their shoul-
ders all the time. What do we do now?” .

“That’s what I've been thinking” muttered Donovan. “We
can’t go out on the surface, with a robot or without. Oh, for the
love of Pete”’—and he snapped his fingers twice. He grew ex-
cited. “Give me that map you’ve got. I haven't studied it for two
hours for nothing. This is a Mining Station. What’s wrong with us-
ing the tunnels?”

The Mining Station was a black circle on the map, and the
light dotted lines that were tunnels stretched out about it in spi-
derweb fashion. :

Donovan studied the list of symbols at the bottom of the map.
“Look” he said, “the small black dots are openings to the surface,
and here’s one maybe three miles away from the selenium pool.
There’s a number here—you'd think they’d write larger—13a. If
the robots know their way around here—”

Powell shot the question and received the dull “Yes, Master,”
in reply. “Get your insosuit,’ he said with satisfaction.

It was the first time either had worn the insosuits—which
marked one time more than either had expected to upon their
arrival the day before—and they tested their limp movements
uncomfortably. .

The insosuit was far bulkier and far uglier than the regulation
spacesuit; but withal considerably lighter, due to the fact that

they were entirely nonmetallic in composition. Composed of
heat-resistant plastic and chemically treated cork layers, and
equipped with a desiccating unit to keep the air bone-dry, the in-

sosuits could withstand the full glare of Mercury’s sun for

twenty minutes. Five to ten minutes more, as well, without actu-

ally killing the occupant.
And still the robot’s hands formed the stirrup, nor did he be-

|. ROBOT al

tray the slightest atom of surprise at the

which Powell had been converted.
Powell’s radio-harshened voice boomed out:

take us to Exit 13a?” ,
“Yes, Master”

; Good, thought Powell; they might lack radio control but at
least they were fitted for radio reception. “Mount one or the
other, Mike,’ he said to Donovan.

He placed a foot in the improvised stirrup and swung upward
He found the seat comfortable; there was the humped back of
the robot, evidently shaped for the purpose, a shallow groove
along each shoulder for the thighs and two elongated “
whose purpose now seemed obvious.

Powell seized the ears and twisted the head. His mount turned

ponde: ly Lead on, duff? But =
2
onderous! Mac ut he did not feel at all light:

grotesque figure into

“Are you ready to

ears”

The gigantic robots moved slowly, with mechanical precision,
through the doorway that cleared their heads by a scant foot 50
om mee two men had to duck hurriedly, along a narrow corridor
inte the Ke tahurried footsteps boomed monotonously and

The long, airless tunnel that stretched toa pinpoint before
them brought home forcefully to Powell the exact magnitude of
the task accomplished by the First Expedition, with their crude
robots and their start-from-scratch necessities. They might have
been a failure, but their failure was a good deal better than th
usual run of the System’s successes. "

The robots plodded onward with a
with footsteps that never lengthened.

Powell said: “Notice that these tunnels are blazing with lights
and that the temperature is Earth-normal. It’s probably heen like
this all the ten years that this place has remained empty?”

“How’s that?” an ,

Cheap energy; cheapest in the System. Sunpower, you know,

pace that never varied and



--- Page 21 ---
32 . ISAAC ASIMOV

and on Mercury’s Sunside, sunpower is something. That’s why
the Station was built in the sunlight rather than in the shadow of
a mountain. It’s really a huge energy converter. The heat is
turned into electricity, light, mechanical work and what have
you; so that energy is supplied and the Station is cooled in a si-
multaneous process.”

“Look,” said Donovan. “This is all very educational, but would
you mind changing the subject? It so happens that this conver-
sion of energy that you talk about is carried on by the photo-cell
banks mainly—and that is a tender subject with me at the mo-
ment”

Powell grunted vaguely, and when Donovan broke the result-
ing silence, it was to change the subject completely. “Listen,
Greg. What the devil’s wrong with Speedy, anyway? I can’t un-
derstand it.”

It’s not easy to shrug shoulders in an insosuit, but Powell tried
it. “I don’t know, Mike. You know he’s perfectly adapted to a Metr-
curian environment. Heat doesn’t mean anything to him and he’s
built for the light gravity and the broken ground. He’s fool-
proof—or, at least, he should be”

Silence fell. This time, silence that lasted.

“Master, said the robot, “we are here”

“Eh?” Powell snapped out of a semidrowse. “Well, get us out
of here—out to the surface”

They found themselves in a tiny substation, empty, airless, ru-
ined. Donovan had inspected a jagged hole in the upper reaches
of one of the walls by the light of his pocket flash.

“Meteorite, do you suppose?” he had asked.

Powell shrugged. “To hell with that. It doesn’t matter. Let’s ‘get
out.”

A towering cliff of a black, basaltic rock cut off thé sunlight,
and the deep night shadow of an airless world surrounded them.
Before them, the shadow reached out and ended in knife-edge
abruptness into an all-but-unbearable blaze of white light, that
glittered from myriad crystals along a rocky ground.

!, ROBOT a3

“Space!” gasped Donovan. “It looks like snow.” And it did.

Powell’s eyes swept the jagged glitter of Mercury to the -hori-
zon and winced at the gorgeous brilliance.

“This must be an unusual area,” he said. “The general albedo
of Mercury is low and most of the soil is gray pumice. Something
like the Moon, you know. Beautiful, isn’t it?”

He was thankful for the light filters in their visiplates. Beauti-
ful or not, a look at the sunlight through straight glass would
have blinded them inside of half a minute.

Donovan was looking at the spring thermometer on his wrist.
“Holy smokes, the temperature is eighty centigrade!” .

Powell checked his own and said: “Un-m-m. A little high. At.
mosphere, you know”

“On Mercury? Are you nuts?”

“Mercury isn’t really airless” explained Powell, in absent-
minded fashion. He was adjusting the binocular attachments to
his visiplate, and the bloated fingers of the insosuit were clumsy
at it. “There is a thin exhalation that clings to its surface—vapors
of the more volatile elements and compounds that are heavy
enough for Mercurian gravity to retain. You know: selenium, io-

. dine, mercury, gallium, potassium, bismuth, volatile oxides. The

vapors sweep into the shadows and condense, giving up heat.
It’s a sort of gigantic still. In fact, if you use your flash, you'll prob-
ably find that the side of the cliff is covered with, say, hoar-

_ Sulphur, or maybe quick-silver dew.

“It doesn’t matter, though. Our suits can stand a measly eighty
indefinitely”

Powell had adjusted the binocular attachments, so that he
seemed as eye-stalked as a snail.

Donovan watched tensely. “See anything?”

The other did not answer immediately, and when he did, his
voice Was anxious and thoughtful. “There’s a dark spot on the
horizon that might be the selenium pool. It’s in the right place.
But I don’t see Speedy.”

Powell clambered upward in an instinctive striving for better



--- Page 22 ---
a4 ISAAC ASIMOV

view, till he was standing in unsteady fashion upon his robot’s
shoulders. Legs straddled wide, eyes straining, he said: “I
think ... . I think— Yes, it’s definitely he. He’s coming this way.”

Donovan followed the pointing finger. He had no binoculars,
but there was a tiny moving dot, black against the blazing bri
liance of the crystalline ground.

“I see him,” he yelled. “Let’s get going!”

Powell had hopped down into a sitting position on the robot
again, and his suited hand slapped against the Gargantuan’s bar-
rel chest. “Get going!”

“Giddy-ap,” yelled Donovan, and thumped his heels, spur
fashion.

The robots started off, the regular thudding of their footsteps
silent in the airlessness, for the nonmetallic fabric of the inso-
suits did not transmit sound. There was only a rhythmic vibra-
tion just below the border of actual hearing.

“Faster,” yelled Donovan. The rhythm did not change.

“No use,” cried Powell, in reply. “These junk heaps are only
geared to one speed. Do you think they’re equipped with selec-
tive flexors?” :

They had burst through the shadow, and the sunlight came
down in a white-hot wash and poured liquidly about them.

Donovan ducked involuntarily. “Wow! Is it imagination or do I
feel heat?”

- “You'll feel more presently.” was the grim reply. “Keep your
eye on Speedy” ~

Robot SPD 13 was near enough to be seen in detail now. His
graceful, streamlined body threw out blazing highlights as he
loped with easy speed across the broken ground. His name was
derived from his serial initials, of course, but it was apt, never-
theless, for the SPD models were among the fastest robots
turned out by the United States Robot & Mechanical Men Corp.

“Hey, Speedy,’ howled Donovan, and waved a frantic hand.

1, ROBOT 35

“Speedy!” shouted Powell. “Come here!”

The distance between the men and the errant robot was be-
ing cut down momentarily—more by the efforts of Speedy than
the slow plodding of the fifty-year-old antique mounts of Dono-
van and Powell. ;

They were close enough now to notice that Speedy’s gait in-
cluded a peculiar rolling stagger, a noticeable side-to-sidé lurch—
and then, as Powell waved his hand again and sent maximum
juice into his compact head-set radio sender, in preparation for
another shout, Speedy looked up and saw them.

Speedy hopped to a halt and remained standing for a mo-
ment—with just a tiny, unsteady weave, as though he were sway-
ing in a light wind.

Powell yelled: “All right, Speedy. Come here, boy:”

Whereupon Speedy’s robot voice sounded in Powell’s ear-
phones for the first time,

It said: “Hot dog, let’s play games. You catch me and I catch
you; no love can cut our knife in two. For I’m Little Buttercup,
sweet Little Buttercup. Whoops!” Turning on his heel, he sped
off in the direction from which he had come, with a speed and
fury that kicked up gouts of baked dust.

And his last words as he receded into the distance were,
“There grew a little flower neath a great oak tree,” followed by a
curious metallic clicking that might have been a robotic equiva-
lent of a hiccup.

Donovan said weakly: “Where did he Pick up the Gilbert and
Sullivan? Say, Greg, he . . . he’s drunk or something”

“If you hadn’t told me” was the bitter response, “I’d never re-
alize it. Let’s get back to the cliff. I’m roasting”

It was Powell who broke the desperate silence. “In the first
place,” he said, “Speedy isn’t drunk—not in the human sense—
because he’s a robot, and robots don’t get drunk. However,
there’s something wrong with him which is the robotic equiva-
lent of drunkenness.”

“To.me, he’s drunk,” stated Donovan, emphatically, “and all 1

ee

aay

ae

Hi
Hi
if



--- Page 23 ---
36 ISAAC ASIMOV

know is that he thinks we're playing games. And we're not. It’s a
matter of life and very gruesome death”

“All right. Don’t hurry me. A robot's only a robot. Once we find
out what’s wrong with him, we can fix it and go on”

“Once,” said Donovan, sourly.

Powell ignored him. “Speedy is perfectly adapted to normal
Mercurian environment. But this region”—and his arm swept
wide—“is definitely abnormal. There’s our clue. Now where do
these crystals come from? They might bave formed from a
slowly cooling liquid; but where would you get liquid so hot that
it would cool in Mercury’s sun?”

“Volcanic action,’ suggested Donovan, instantly, and Powell’s
body tensed.

“Out of the mouths of sucklings,” he said in a small, strange
voice and remained very still for five minutes.

Then, he said, “Listen, Mike, what did you say to Speedy when —
you sent him after the selenium?”

Donovan was taken aback. “Well damn it—I don’t know. I just
told him to get it”

“Yes, I know. But how? Try to remember the exact words.”

“ITsaid...uh... I said:‘Speedy, we need some selenium. You
can get it such-and-such a place. Go get it? That’s all. What more
did you want me to say?”

“You didn’t put any urgency into the order, did you?”

“What for? It was pure routine” .

Powell sighed. “Well, it can’t be helped now—but we’re in a
fine fix.” He had dismounted from his robot, and was sitting, back
against the cliff. Donovan joined him and they linked arms. In the
distance the burning sunlight seemed to wait cat-and-mouse for
them, and just next to them, the two giant robots were invisible
but for the dull red of their photoelectric eyes that stared down
at them, unblinking, unwavering and unconcerned.

Unconcerned! As was all this poisonous Mercury, as large in
jinx as it was small in size.

Powell’s radio voice was tense in Donovan’s ear: “Now, look,

|, ROBOT |. 37

let’s start with the three fundamental Rules of Robotics—the
three rules that are built most deeply into a robot’s Positronic
brain.” In the darkness, his gloved fingers ticked off each point
“We have: One, a robot may not injure a human being; or
through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.” _
“Right!”
“Two,” continued Powell, “a robot must obey the orders given

it by human beings except where such
orders would i
with the First Law” “eames

“Right!”

“And three, a robot must protect its own existence as long as
such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Laws”

“Right! Now where are we?”

“Exactly at the explanation. The conflict between the various
rules is ironed out by the different positronic potentials in the
brain. We'll say that a robot is walking into danger and knows it

The automatic potential that Rule 3 sets up turns him back. But
Suppose you order him to walk into that danger. In that case
Rule 2 sets up a counterpotential higher than the previous one
and the robot follows orders at the tisk of existence”

“Well, I know that.What about it?” :
“Let’s take Speedy’s case. Speedy is one of the latest models

extremely specialized, and as expensive as a battleship. It’s not a

thing to be lightly destroyed”
“So?”

“So Rule 3 has been strengthened—that was specifically men-
tioned, by the way, in the advance notices on the SPD models—
so that his allergy to danger is unusually high. At the same time
when you sent him out after the selenium, you gave him his or.
der casually and without special emphasis, so that the Rule 2 po-
fone Set-up was rather weak. Now, hold on; I'm just stating

“All right, go ahead. I think I get it”
“You see how it works, don’t you? There’s some sort of danger
centering at the selenium pool It increases as he approaches,



