--- Page 1 ---
y THE CALL OF CTHULHU

AND OTHER.
WEIRD STORIES

H. P. LOVECRAFT

EDITED WITH AN
INTRODUCTION AND NOTES BY
S. T. JOSHI

PENGUIN BOOKS



--- Page 2 ---
138 H. P, LOVECRAFT

to the hall door, and thence to the desk, where a terrible little
pool had accumulated. Something was scrawled there in pencil in
an awful, blind hand on a piece of paper hideously smeared as
though by the very claws that traced the hurried last words.
Then the trail led to the couch and ended unutterably.

What was, or had been, on the couch I cannot and dare not
say here. But this is what I shiveringly puzzled out on the stick-
ily smeared paper before I drew a match and burned it to a crisp;
what I puzzled out in terror as the landlady and two mechanics
rushed frantically from that hellish place to babble their incoher-
ent stories at the nearest police station. The nauseous words
seemed well-nigh incredible in that yellow sunlight, with the
clatter of cars'and motor trucks ascending clamorously from
crowded Fourtéenth Street, yet I confess that I believed them
then. Whether [-believe them now I honestly do not know. There
are things about which it is better not to speculate, and all that I
can say is that I hate the smell of ammonia, and grow faint at a
draught of unusually cool air. ‘

“The end,” ran the noisome scrawl, “is here. No more ice—
the man looked and ran away. Warmer every minute, and the tis-
sues can’t last. I fancy you know—what I said about the will and
the nerves and the preserved body after the organs ceased to
work. It was good theory, but couldn’t keep up indefinitely.
There was a gradual deterioration I had not foreseen. Dr. Torres
knew, but the shock killed him. He couldn’t stand what he had
to do—he had to get me in a strange, dark place when he minded

my letter and nursed me back. And the organs never would work.

again. It had to be done my way——artificial preservation—for
you see I died-that time eighteen years ago.”

The Call of Cthulhu

(Found Among the Pa
2 pers of the Lat
Francis Wayland Thurston, of Boston)

“OF such great powers or bein
ceivably a survival . .
period when...
haps,

‘ings there may be con-
“a survival of a hugely remote
- Consciousness was manifested

; er-
; in shapes and forms long since withdrawn be-
ore the tide of advancing humanity

which poetry and legend alone have caught a flying

memory and called them gods i
beings of all sorts and kinds .. °» monsressy mythical

-. forms of

—Algernon Blackwood.

L
THE HORROR IN CLAY.

The m iful ‘thing i
theha anti thing in the world, I think, is the inability of
island of ina 0 correlate all its contents. We live on a placid
was mex ie spranee in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it
Straining in its own “dnection. have ee far The sriences, each
pe OWN | C . utherto harmed us little:
open uy ie Piecing together of dissociated Knowledge ; wil
on tent fying vistas of reality, and of our frightful posi-
or flee from the deedl ta either go mad from the revelation
dark age? adly ight into the peace and safety of a new
Theosophists‘
cosmmie yee wt ave guessed at the awesome grandeur of the
incidents Thee n our world and human race form transient
would freeze ie re hinted at strange survivals in terms which
it is not from! them that there masked by a bland optimism. But
den aeons which hill: Svhen T re Single glimpse of forbid-
yen chills me when I think of it and maddens me

139



--- Page 3 ---
0 H. P, LOVECRAFT

when I dream of it. That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, .
flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separated
things—in this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a

- dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piec-
ing out; certainly, if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link
in so hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended to
keep silent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have
destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized him.

My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926-27
with the death of my grand-uncle George Gammell Angell,’ Pro-
fessor Emeritus of Semitic Languages in Brown University,
Providence, Rhode-Island. Professor Angell was widely known
as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been
resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; so that his pass-

- ing at the age of ninety-two’ may be recalled by many. Locally,
interest was intensified by the obscurity. of the cause of death.
The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the New-
port boat; falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been
jostled by a nautical-looking negro who had come from one of
the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside* which formed a
short cut from the waterfront to the deceased’s home in Williams
Street. Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but
concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the
heart, induced by the brisk ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly
a man, was responsible for the end. At the time I saw no reason
to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am inclined to won-
der—and more than wonder.

As my grand-uncle’s heir and executor, for he died a childless
widower, I was expected to go over his papers with some thor-
oughness; and for that purpose moved his entire set of files:and
boxes to my quarters in Boston. Much of the material which I
correlated will be later published by the American Archaeologi-
cal Society, but there was one box which I found exceedingly
puzzling, and which 1 felt much averse from shewing to other
eyes. It had been locked, and I did not find the key till it oc-
curred to me to examine the personal ring which the professor
carried always in his pocket. Then indeed I succeeded in opening
it, but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 141

and more closely locked barrier .
: For what i
of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed jonting ee meaning

. + 8s
and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his joner ya

become
become fredulous of the most superficial impostures? I resolved
€ eccentric sculptor responsi i
nsible f
disturbance of an old man’s peace of inind or this apparent
ance of .
and ak pasxeliel was a ough rectangle less than an inch thick
'Y six inches in area; obvious| igi
and abe ; obviously of modern o
rs designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere end
re an
Beestions or although the vagaries of cubism and futurism? are
i ny and rie 5 they “ not often reproduce that cryptic regular
rks in prehistoric writing. And writi i
iy ; g- And writing of some kin
bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my

memory, despite much familiarity with the papers and collec-

tions of iled i i
tons my uncle, failed In any way to identify this particular
pecies, or even to hint at its remotest affiliations

Above these appa ie! i
picts! inne pparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently

though its impressionisti i
: ; pressionistic execution for
very clear idea of its nature. It seemed to be a sort of roonee :
om fo) “epresenting a monster, of a form which only a disea od
an yond arate if i say that my somewhat extravagant
‘ ea simultaneous pictures of an
: : octo
Sragon, anc a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to che
ee - t thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a
oe 4 am scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was the
anes re pane whole which made it most shockingly
. Behind the figure was a v i
pean architectural background, "ae suegemion of a Cyclo-

of ad writing accompany ing this oddity was, aside from a stack
tings, in Professor Angell’s m
made no pretence to literar 1 ened be wh nn
y style. What seemed to b i
document was headed “CTHULHU CULT” in shee main
Pa nsta ingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word
na card woh The manuscript was divided into two sections
a net was headed “1925—Dream and Dream Work
- A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St., Providence, R.I.”
; . » RL”, and the sec-
enc Oatrative of Inspector John R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St
ew Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S. Mtg.—Notes: on Same &



--- Page 4 ---
142 H. P. LOVECRAFT

. ef
Webb's Acct.” The other manuscript papers were all brief
ae vvome of them accounts of the queer dream. of dilfer
ent persons, some of them citations from theosop iva ooks
and magazines (notably W. Scott-Elliot’s Atlantis and the fos
Lemuria),® and the rest comments on long-surviving secre so
cieties and hidden cults, with references to passages 2 ; ne
mythological and anthropological source-books a ra ers
Golden Bough and Miss Murray’s Witch-Cult in western -
rope." The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illnesses a
outbreaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925. har
The first half of the principal manuscript told a very pecu! _
tale. It appears that on March ist, 1925, a thin, ar young mar
of neurotic and excited aspect hed called peo co te y
ing the singular clay bas-relief, which was
ene end fresh His card bore the name of Henry Anthony
Wilcox," and my uncle pad recognised bin ss the yoo
of an excellent family slightly known to him, ;
ing sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design
eet ving alae at the Fleur-de-Lys Building near thar institu
tion.” Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius ra ere ‘1
eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attention roe 8
the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the abit of re . ing.
He called himself “psychically hypersensitive”, butt . staid folk
of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely queer :
Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually

from social visibility, and was now known only to a small group

+ 4
of aesthetes from other towns. Even the Providence Art Che
anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hope
less. . ;

occasion of the visit, ran the professor s manuscript,
the wealpaos abruptly asked for the benefit of his host ‘s szchaeo-
logical knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics en. the Pass
relief. He spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner whic sueee |
pose and alienated sympathy; and my uncle shewed fom ; uP
ness in replying, for the conspicuous freshness of the an im
plied kinship with anything but archaeology. Young 1 co -
rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him rea
and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast w!

. green ooze and sinister with latent horror.

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 143
must have typified his whole conversation, and which I have
since found highly characteristic of him. He said, “It is new, in-
deed, for. I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and
dreams are older then brooding Tyre,
Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon,”

It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly
played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of
my uncle. There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night
before, the most considerable felt in New England for some
years; and Wilcox’s imagination had been keenly affected. Upon

‘retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean
cities of titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with

Hieroglyphics had

covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined point
below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation
which only fancy would transmute into sound, but which he
attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of
letters, “ Cthulhu fhtagn”.”

This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which ex-
cited and disturbed Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor
with scientific minuteness; and studied with almost frantic inten-
sity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself work-
ing, chilled and clad only in his night-clothes, when waking had
stolen bewilderingly over him. My uncle blamed his old age,
Wilcox afterward said, for his slowness in recognising both hi-
eroglyphics and pictorial design. Many of his questions seemed
highly out-of-place to his visitor, especially those which tried to
connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and Wilcox
could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he
was offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some
widespread mystical or paganly religious body. When Professor
Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant
of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with
demands for future reports of dreams. This bore regular fruit, for

after the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of the

young man, during which he related startling fragments of noc-
turnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclo-
pean vista of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or

or the contemplative



--- Page 5 ---
4 H. P. LOVECRAFT

i in enigmatical sense-impacts
intelligence shouting monotonously in enigma’
tininseribable save as gibberish. The two sounds most Frequently
repeated are those rendered by the letters “Cthulhu” a
Ree ech 23d, the manuscript continued, Wilcox fied to
appear; and inquiries at his quarters revealed that me pad een
n wi taken to the
stricken with an obscure sort of fever an é she homeo
i ily i '® He had cried out in the night,
his family in Waterman Street. jad spight,
i ists in the building, and had manifeste
arousing several other artists in t x t had manifested
ince then only alternations: of unconsciousne I .
My ‘uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time ae
i-of: ; calling often at the
d kept close watch-of:the case; calling a
Sueet®™ Sifice of Dr. Tobey; whom he learned to be in charge. The
youth’s febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on Strange * nines:
| : d then as he spoke o .
and the| doctor! shuddered now an cnr eee
They included not only. a repetition of what | nad erly
dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing mis igh
which walked or lumbered about. He ae no time fly escribe
is obj i i epeated by Dr. To-
this object, but occasional frantic words, as rey oy ee
i hat it must be identical wit!
bey, convinced the professor t identical wi C
‘ ity | ht to depict in his dream
nameless monstrosity he had soug cr in Bis dream
re. Reference to this object, the doctor added, i
See prelude to the young man’s subsidence into lethargy. us
temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal: ut
his whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever
than mental disorder. ,
me April 2nd at about 3 p.m. every trace of Wilcox’s malady
suddenly ceased. He sat upright in bed, astonished to find a
self at home and completely ignorant of what had happened in

dream or reality since the night of March 22nd. Pronounced well °

by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but °
Professor Angell he was of no further assistance. , sa
strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, = my uncle
kept no record of his night-thoughts after a week of p
and irrelevant accounts pf thoroughly usual visions. ‘ oto
Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but re erence eo
certain of the scattered notes gave me much materia’ or
thought—so much, in fact, that only the ingrained scep

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 145
then forming my philosophy can account for my continued dis-
trust of the artist. The notes in question were those descriptive of
the dreams of various Persons covering the same'period as that in
which young Wilcox had had his Strange visitations. My uncle, it
‘seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of
inquiries amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question
without impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams,
and the dates of any notable visions for some time past. The re-
ception of his request seems to have been varied; but he must, at
the very least, have received more responses than any ordinary

man could have handled without a secretary. This original corre-

spondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough
and really significant digest. Average people in society and busi-
ness—New England’s traditional “salt of the earth”—gave an
almost completely: negative result, though scattered cases of un-
easy but formless nocturnal impressions appear here and there,
always betweer: March 23d and April 2nd —the period of young

Wilcox’s delirium. : Scientific men were little more affected,

though four cases of vague description suggest fugitive glimpses

of strange landscapes, and in one case there is mentioned a dread
of something abnormal.

It was from the artists and:
came, and I know that panic w
been able to compare notes. As
ters, I half suspected the compil
tions, or of having edited the co
what he had latently resolved t
feel that Wilcox, somehow co

poets that the pertinent answers
ould have broken loose had they
it was, lacking their original let-
er of having asked leading ques-
rrespondence in corroboration of
© see. That is why I continued to

gnisant of the old data which my
uncle had possessed, had been imposing on the veteran scientis¢.

These responses from aesthetes told a disturbing tale. From Feb-
Tuary 28th to April 2nd-a large proportion of them had dreamed
very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasur-
ably the stronger during the period of the sculptor’s delirium,
Over a fourth of those who teported anything, reported scenes
and half-sounds not unlike those which Wilcox had described;
and some of the dreamers confessed acute fear of the gigantic
nameless thing visible toward the last. One case, which the note

describes with emphasis, was very sad. 'The subject, a widely



--- Page 6 ---
|
|
i
Hy

146 H. P. LOVECRAFT

known architect with leanings toward theosophy and occultism,
went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox’s seizure, and
expired several months later after incessant screamings to’ be
saved from some escaped denizen of hell. Had my uncle referred
to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I should
have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation;
but as it was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of
these, however, bore out the notes in full. I have often wondered °
if all the objects of the professor’s questioning felt as puzzled as
did this fraction. It is well that no explanation shall ever reach
them.

The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of
Panic, mania, and eccentricity during the given period. Professor
Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of
extracts was tremendous and the sources scattered throughout
the globe. Here was-a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone
sleeper had leaped from a window after a shocking cry. Here
likewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South Amer-

“ica, where a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has

seen. A despatch from California describes a theosophist colony

as donning white robes en masse for some “glorious fulfilment”

which never arrives, whilst items from India speak guardedly of
serious native unrest toward the end of March. Voodoo orgies

multiply in Hayti, and African outposts report ominous mutter-
ings. American officers in the Philippines find certain tribes
bothersome about this time, and New York policemen are
mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of March 22-23.
The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumour and legendry, and
a fantastic painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous
“Dream Landscape” in the Paris spring salon of 1926. And so
numerous are the recorded troubles in insane asylums, that only
a miracle can have stopped the medical fraternity from noting
strange parallelisms and drawing mystified conclusions. A weird
bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage
the callous rationalism with which I set them aside. But I was
then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older mat-
ters mentioned by the professor,

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 147

. II.
THE TALE OF INSPECTOR LEGRASSE.

The older matters which had made the sculp;
relief so significant to my uncle formed the
half of his long manuscript. Once before, j

puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the omi-
nous syllables which can be rendered only as “Crhulbu; and all
this in so stirring and horrible a connexion that it is small won-

der he pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data

_ The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the f f
Interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplace-looki ,
paiddle-aged man who had travelled all the way from New On .
eans for Certain special information unobtainable from any Io |
source. His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by

said ° a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous
ere the rites connected with it, that the poli i
alise that they had stumbled on a d, lt toully uaken
hey had ark cult totally unkno t
nem, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the
rican voodoo circles. OF its origin, apart from the erratic and

1
t



--- Page 7 ---
148 ; H. P. LOVECRAFT.

unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, *
solutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxiety at e
police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place
the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its
fountain-head.
Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation
which his offering created. One sight of the thing had beer
enough to throw the assembled men of science into a state o
tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him
to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air

of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened :
and archaic vistas. No recognised school of sculpture had ani-

mated this terrible. object, yet centuries and even thousands of
years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish surface of un-
placeable stone.

‘The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man
for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches
intheight, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship. It represented

a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-

like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-
looking body, prodigious claws on’ hind and fore feet, and long,
narrow wings behind. This thing, which seemed instinct with a
fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated
corpulence, and’ squatted evilly on a rectangular block or

pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. The tips of the .

wings.touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the
centre, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouch-
ing hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of
the way down toward the bottom of the pedestal. The cephalo-
pod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers
brushed the backs of huge fore paws which clasped the
croucher’s elevated knees. The aspect of the whole was abnor-
mally life-like, and the more subtly fearful because its source was
so totally unknown. Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was
unmistakable; yet not one link did it shew with any known type

of art belonging to civilisation’s youth—or indeed to any other:

time. Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery;
for the soapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 149

flecks and striations resembled nothing familiar to geology or
mineralogy. The characters along the base were equally baffling;
and no member present, despite a representation of half the
world’s expert learning in this. field, could form the least notion
of even the remotest linguistic kinship. They, like the subject and
material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct
from mankind as we know it; something frightfully suggestive of
old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our
conceptions have no part.”
And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and con-
fessed defeat at the Inspector’s problem, there was one man in
that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in-the
monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some
diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. This person was the late
William Channing Webb, Professor of Anthropology in Prince-
ton University, and an explorer of no slight note. Professor
Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tour of
Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions
which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West
Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of de-
generate Esquimaux" whose religion, a curious form of devil-
worship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and
repulsiveness. It was a faith of which other Esquimaux knew lit-
tle, and which they mentioned only with shudders, saying that it
had come down from horribly ancient aeons before ever the
world was made. Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices
there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed to a
supreme elder devil or tornaswk; and of this Professor Webb had
taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizard-
priest, expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew
how.” But just now of prime significance was the fetish which
this cult:had cherished, and around which they danced when the
aurora léaped high over the ice cliffs. It was, the professor stated,
a very crude bas-relief of stone, comprising a hideous picture and
some cryptic writing. And so far as he could tell, it was a rough
parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying be-
fore the meeting.

This data,” received with suspense and astonishment by the


--- Page 8 ---
150 H. P. LOVECRAFT

assembled members, proved doubly exciting to Inspector
Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his informant with ques-
tions. Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp
cult-worshippers his men had arrested, he besought the profes-
sor to remember as best he might the syllables taken down
amongst the diabolist Esquimaux. There then followed an ex-
haustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed si-
lence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual
identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many
worlds of distance apart. What, in substance, both the Esquimau
wizards and the Louisiana swamp-priests had chanted to their
kindred idols was something very like this—the word-divisions
being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted
aloud: :

“Ph’nglui mghw’nafh Cthulhu Rlyeh weah’nagl fhtagn.”
Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several
among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older cel-
ebrants had told them the words meant. This text, as given, ran
something like this:

“In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulbu waits dreaming.”

And now, in response to a general and urgent demand, Inspec-
tor Legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the
swamp worshippers; telling a story to which I could see my un-
cle attached profound significance. It savoured of the wildest
dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an aston-
ishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half-castes and
pariahs as might be expected to possess it.

On November 1st, 1907, there had come to the New Orleans
police a frantic summons from the swamp and lagoon country to
the south. The squatters there, mostly primitive but good-
natured descendants of Lafitte’s men,” were in the gtip of stark
terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon them in
the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terri-
ble sort than they had ever known; and some of their women and

children had disappeared since the malevolent tom-tom had be-
gun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods
where no dweller ventured. There were insane shouts and har-
rowing screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing devil-flames;

THE CALL OF CTHULHU . 154

and, the frigh
an b the rightened messenger added, the people could stand it
So a body of twenty police, fillin i
. § two carriages and an auto-
mobile, had Set out in the late afternoon. with the shivering
squatter as a guide. At the end of the passable road they alighted

and every fungous islet combined to create. A’

] . At length th -
ter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sigh, and hys.
terical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing

men. There were legends of a hidden lake ungli

sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white polyons reine
luminous, eyes; and Squatters whispered that bat-winged “devils
flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight
They said it had been there before D’Iberville before La Salle.®
before the Indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and
birds of the woods. It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to
die. But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep

away. / i
way. Thej present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe

more thanjthe shocking sounds and incidents, ;
b Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard
y Legrasse 8 men as they ploughed on through the black morass



--- Page 9 ---
152 H. P. LOVECRAFT

toward the red glare and the muffled tom-toms. There are vocal
qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts;
and it js terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the
other. Animal fury and orgiastic licence here whipped themselves
to daemoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstasies that tore
and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential
tempests from the gulfs of hell. Now and then the less organised
ululation would cease, and from what seemed a well-drilled cho-
rus of hoarse voices would rise in sing-song chant that hideous
phrase or ritual: .

“Ph'nglui mglw’nafh Cthulbu R’lyeh weah’nagl fhtagn.”
Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thin-
ner, came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them
reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which
the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse
dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all
stood trembling and nearly hypnotised with horror.

Ina natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of per-
haps an acre’s extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this
now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human
abnormality than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint.”
Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing, and
writhing about a monstrous ring-shaped bonfire; in the centre of
which, revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood
a great granite monolith some eight feet in height; on top of
which, incongruous with its diminutiveness, rested the noxious

carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at reg-
ular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a centre hung, head
downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters
who had disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of
worshippers jumped and roared, the general direction of the
mass motion being from left to right in endless Bacchanal be-
tween the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.

Tt may have been only imagination and it may have been only
echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to
fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some far
and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient leg-
endry and horror. This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met and

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 153

questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed
went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a
glimpse of shining eyes and a, mountainous white bulk beyond
the remotest trees—but I suppose he had been hearing too much
native superstition.

Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively
brief duration. Duty came first; and although there must have
been nearly a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the po-
lice relied on their firearms and plunged determinedly “into the
nauseous rout. For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were
beyond description. Wild blows were struck, shots were fired
and escapes were made; but in the end Legrasse was able to count
some forty-seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in
haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen. Five of
the worshippers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were
carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners.
The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed
and carried back by Legrasse.

Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and
weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low,
mixed-blooded, and mentally aberrant type. Most were seamen,
and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely West Indians
or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands,” gave a
colouring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. But before
many questions were asked, it became manifest that something
far deeper and older than negro fetichism* was involved. De-
graded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with sur-
prising consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.

They worshipped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived.
ages before there were any men, and who came to the young
world out of the sky. Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the
earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their se-

crets in dreams to the first men, who formed a cult which had
never died. This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had al-
ways existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes
and darls places all over the world until the time when the great
priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city of
R’lyeh” under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again



--- Page 10 ---
154 H. P. LOVECRAFT

beneath his sway. Some day he would call, when the stars were
ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liber-
ate him.

Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which
even torture could not extract. Mankind was not absolutely
alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out
of the dark to visit the faithful few. But these were not the Great
Old Ones. No man had ever seen the Old Ones. The carven idol
was great Cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others
were precisely like him. No one could read the old writing now,
but things were told by word of mouth. The chanted ritual was
not the secret—that was never spoken aloud, only whispered.
The chant meant only this: “In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulhu
waits dreaming.” , :

Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be
hanged, and the rest.were committed to various institutions. All
denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing
had been done by Black Winged Ones which had come to them
from their immemorial meeting-place in the haunted wood. But
of those mysterious allies no coherent account ‘could ever be
gained. What the police did extract, came mainly from an im-
mensely aged mestizo named Castro,” who claimed to have
sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of the
cult in the mountains of China.’ :

Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the
speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem
recent and transient indeed. There had been aeons when other
Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great cities. Re-
mains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen:had told him,
were still to be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pa-
cific. They all died vast epochs of time before men came, but
there’ were arts which could revive Them when the stars had
come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity.
They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought
Their images with Them. :

These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed
altogether of flesh and blood. They had shape—for did not this
star-fashioned image prove it?—but that shape was not made of

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 155
matter, When the stars were ri .
ght, They could plunge f
ro world through the sky; but when the stars were wenn "they
could not ve But although They no longer lived, They Soul
ally die. They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of

R'lyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glo

resurrection when the stars a

are : never die
> anc! the secret priests’ would take

till the stars came right again,
b to revive His subjects and resume

great Cthulhu from His tom

es; free and

wild and beyond good and evil,” with laws and morals thrown

aside and all men shoutin illi
; g and killing and ling in j
he liberated Qld Ones would teach them new. ways to ure
Ul and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame

In the elderitime chosen me
der; n had talked with th
Old Ones in dreams, but then something had happened the
Brest prone fae R'lyeh, with its monoliths and sepuichres, had
eneath the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one pri

mal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut



--- Page 11 ---
156 H. P. LOVECRAFT

mouldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumours picked up in cav-
erns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them old Castrp
dared not speak much. He cut himself. off hurriedly, ane 1 no
amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this inee-
tion. The size of the Old Ones, too, he curiously decline “
mention. Of the cult, he said that he thought the centre "y amg
the pathless deserts of Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars,
dreams hidden and untouched. It was not allied to the European
witch-cult, and was virtually unknown beyond its members. °
book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless ehinamee
said that there were double meanings in the Necronomicon of the
mad Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as they
chose, especially the much-discussed couplet:

“That is not dead which can eternal lie, ;
And with strange aeons even death may die.”*

Legrasse, deeply impressed and nota little bewildered, had in-
quired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Cae
tro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was w’ ° y
secret. The authorities at Tulane University could shed no ight
upon either cult or image, and now the detective had come to ns e
highest authorities in the country and met with no more than the
Greenland tale of Professor Webb. ; vetal

The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse’s tale,

corroborated as it was by the statuette,.is echoed in the subse- ,

quent correspondence of those who attended; although scant
mention occurs in the formal publications of the society. canaén
is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charla-
tanry and imposture. Legrasse for some time lent the image | to
Professor Webb, but at the latter’s death it was returned to him
and remains in his possession, where I viewed it not long feo. It
is truly a terrible ng and unmistakably akin to the dream-
oung Wilcox. ;
ac es sas excited by the tale of the sculptor I tid not
wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a
knowledge of what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensi
tive young man who had dreamed not only the figure and exact

THE CALL OF CTHULHU . 157

hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland
devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the
Precise words of the formula uttered alike by Esquimau dia-
bolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell’s instant start
on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was eminently
natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having
heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a
series of dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my un-
cle’s expense. The dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the
professor were, of course, strong corroboration; but the rational-
ism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject led me
to adopt what I thought the most sensible:conclusions. So, after
thoroughly studying the Manuscript again and correlating the
theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of
Legrasse, I made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give
him the rebuke I thought proper for so boldly imposing ‘upon a
learned and aged man.

Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in
Thomas Street, a hideous Victorian imitation of seventeenth-
century Breton architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front
amidst the lovely colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under

" the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America® 1

found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the
specimens scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and
authentic. He will, I believe, some time be heard from as one of
the great decadents; for he has crystallised in clay and will one
day mirror in marble those nightmares and phantasies which
Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark: Ashton Smith makes
visible in verse and in painting.**

Dark, frail, and somewhat unlsempt in aspect, he turned lan-
guidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising.
When I told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my
uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet
had never explained the reason for the study. I did not enlarge his
knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw
him out. In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sin-
cerity, for he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mis-
take. They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his


--- Page 12 ---
158 . H. P. LOVECRAFT

art profoundly, and he shewed me a morbid statue whose con-
tours almost made me shake with the potency of its black sug-
gestion. He could not recall having seen the original of this thing
except in his own dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed
themselves insensibly under his hands. It was, no doubt, the gi-
ant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he really knew noth-
ing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle’s relentless
catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to
think of some way in which he could possibly have received the
weird impressions.

He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making
me see with terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy
green stone—whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong—
and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless, half-mental
calling from underground: “Cthulhu fhtagn”, “Cthulhu fhtagn”.
These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of
dead Cthulhu’s.dream-vigil in his stone vault at R’lyeh, and I felt
deeply moved despite my rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had
heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it
amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining.
Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subcon-
scious expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible
statue I now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had
been a very innocent one. The youth was of a type, at once
slightly affected and slightly ill-mannered, which I could never
like; but I was willing enough now to admit both his genius and
his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the
success his talent promises.

The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at
times I had visions of personal fame from researches into its ori-
gin and connexions. I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse
and others of that old-time raiding-party, saw the frightful im-
age, and even questioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still
survived. Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some
years. What I now heard so graphically at first-hand, though it
was really no more than a detailed confirmation of what my un-
cle had written, excited me afresh; for I felt sure that I was on the
track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 159
discovery would make me an anthropologist of note. My atti-
tw de was still one of absolute niaterialism, as I wish it still were
an I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coinci-
ence of the dream note i Pr
focal s and odd cuttings collected by Professor
th One thing 1 began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, is
e at my uncle ’s death was far from navural. He fell on a nartow
ri street leading up from an ancient waterfront. swarming with
oreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro. sailor. I did
not foreet the mixed blood and marine pursuits, of the cult-
members in Louisiana, and would not be surprised,to learn of se-
cret methods and poison needles as ruthless and a

known as the cryptic rites and beliefs, Legrasse and
true, have been let alone; j

saw things is dead. Might

§ anciently
| his men, it is
but. mn Norway a certain seaman who
not the deeper inquiries:

after encountering the sculptor’s data have come to Gri
T think Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or b
cause he was likely to learn too much. Whether I shall . he
did remains to be seen; for I have learned much now. a

: III.
THE MADNESS FROM THE SEA.

Tf heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effac-
ing of the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye ona cer
tain stray piege of shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would
naturally have stumbled in the course of my daily round, for it
was an old number of an Australian journal, the Sydney Bulletin
for feat 18, ‘ 1 925 7 Tt chad escaped even the cutting bureau
wich a y ante iss issuance been avidly collecting mate-
Thad largely given over my inquiries into w!

gell called the *Cthulhw Cult”, and was waters learned nny
in Paterson, ew Jersey; the curator of a local museum and a
mineralogist of note.** Examining one day the reserve specimens
roughly set on} the storage shelves in a rear room of the museum
my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old ay ers
spread beneath the stones. It was the Sydney. Bulletin i have



--- Page 13 ---
160 H. P. LOVECRAFT

mentioned, for my friend has wide affiliations in all conceivable
: i s
i a half-tone cut of a hideou
foreign parts; and the picture was ;
stone image almost identical with that which Legrasse had found
‘in the swamp. ; ;

Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents | scanned
the item in detail; and was disappointed to find it of only mo fer
ate length. What it suggested, however, was of portentous sig ae
icance to my flagging quest; and I carefully tore it out fo
immediate action. It read as follows:

MYSTERY DERELICT FOUND AT SEA

igi ives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow.
FR ee Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of
" Desperate Battle and Deaths at Sea.
Rescued Seaman Refuses
Particulars of Strange Experience. —
Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry
to Follow.

ison Co.’s freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso, ar-
tad this orning at ite wharf in Darling Harbour, having : ow
the battled and: disabled but heavily armed steam yacht : a ae
Dunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitu ° ‘| 5
W. Longitude 152° 17” with one living and one dead man al oar .
The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on Apri pee was
driven considerably south of her course by exception: y eavy
storms and monster waves. On April 12th the dere i" was
sighted; and though apparently deserted, was found upon card
ing to contain one survivor in a half-delirious con ition a ze
man who had evidently been dead for more than a week. The liv
ing man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin
about a foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities x Wy -
ney University, the Royal Society, and the Museum a ro) see
Street® all profess complete bafflement, and which 1 eur ;
says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine o:
mn. ;
erThis man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly
strange story of piracy and slaughter. He is Costa Johansen, @
Norwegian of some intelligence, and had been secon ma ° :
two-masted schooner Emma of -Auckland, which sailed for

THE CALL OF CTHULHU

Callao February 20th with a complement of eleven men. The
Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her
course by the great storm of March Ast, and on March 22nd, in
S. Latitude 49° 51°, W. Longitude 128° 34°, encountered the
Alert, manned by a queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas® and
half-castes. Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt.
Collins refused; whereupon. the strange crew began to fire sav-
agely and without warning upon the schooner with a peculiarly
heavy battery of brass cannon forming part of the yacht’s equip-
ment. The Emma’s men shewed fight, says the survivor, and
though the schooner began to sink from shots beneath the water-

161

line they managed to heave alongside their enemy and board her, -

grappling with the savage crew on the yacht’s deck, and being
forced to kill them all, che number being slightly superior, because
of their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather
clumsy mode of fighting.

Three of the Emma’s men, including Capt. Collins and First
Mate Green, were killed; and the remaining eight under Second
Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured. yacht, going
ahead in their original direction to see if any reason for their or-
dering back: had existed. The next day, it appears, they raised and
landed on;a small island, although none is known to exist in that
part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow died ashore,
though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story,
and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm. Later, it seems,
he and oné companion boarded the yacht and tried to manage her,
but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd. From that time
till his resue on the 12th the man remembers little, and he does
not even jrecall when William Briden, his companion, died.
Briden’s death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to
excitement or exposure. Cable advices from Dunedin report that
the Alert was well known there as an island trader, and bore an
evil reputation along the waterfront. It was owned by a curious
group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night trips to
the woods! attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great
haste just after the storm and earth tremors of March 1st. Our
Auckland Correspondent gives the Emma and her crew an excel-
lent reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy
man. The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter
beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce
Johansen to speak more freely than he has done hitherto.



--- Page 14 ---
162 H. P. LOVECRAFT

This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but
what a train of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new trea-
suries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had
strange interests at sea as well as on land. What motive prompted
the hybrid crew to order back the Emma as they sailed about
with their hideous idol? What was the unknown island on which
six of the Emma’s crew had died, and about which the mate Jo-
hansen was so secretive? What had the vice-admiralty’s investiga-
tion brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in
Dunedin? And most marvellous of all, what deep and more than
natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and now
undeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefully
noted by my uncle? oe

March 1st—our February 28th according to the International
Date Line—the earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin
the Alert and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if im-
periously summoned, and on the other side of the earth poets
and/artists‘had begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city
whilst a young sculptor had moulded in his sleep the form of the
dreaded Cthulhu. March 23d the crew of the Emma landed on an
unknown island and left six men dead; and on that date the
dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened vividness and
darkened with dread of a giant monster’s malign pursuit, whilst
an architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly

into delirium! And what of this stor of April 2nd—the date on
which all dreams of the dank city ceased, and Wilcox emerged
unharmed from the bondage of strange fever? What of all this—
and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star-born Old
Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cult and their mastery
of dreams? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors be-
yond man’s power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of the
mind alone, for in some way the second of April had put a stop
to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind’s
ul. ;
~ That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I
‘bade my host adieu and took a train for San Francisco. In less
than a month I was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that
little was known of the strange cult-members who had lingered

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 163

in the old sea-taverns. Waterfront scum was far too common for
special mention; though there was vague talk about one inland
trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming and
red flame were noted on the distant hills. In Auckland I learried
that Johansen had rerurned with yellow hair turned white after a
perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had
thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife
to his old home in Oslo. Of his stirring experience he would tell
his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and
all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.

After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with sea-
men and members of the vice-admiralty court. I saw. the Alert,
now sold and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney
Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal bulk. The
crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly
wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum
at Hyde Park; and I studied it long and well, finding it a thing of
balefully exquisite workmanship, and with the same uttenmys-

"tery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of material

which I had; noted in Legrasse’s smaller specimen. Geologists,
the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they
vowed that the world held no rock like it. Then I thought with a
shudder of what. old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal
Great Ones; |“They had come from the stars, and had brought
Their images;with Them.” ;

Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before
known, I now resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing
for London, Treémbarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and
One autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the
Egeberg.” Johansen’s address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town
of King Harold Haardrada, which kept alive the name of Oslo
during all*the centuries that the greater city masqueraded as
“Christiana”. T made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked
with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and ancient building
with plastered front. A sad-faced woman in black answered-my
summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she. told
me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more. .

He had not survived his return, said his wife, for the doings at



--- Page 15 ---
164 H. P, LOVECRAFT

sea in 1925 had broken him.,He had told her no more than he
had told the public, but had left a long manuscript—of “techni-
cal matters” as he said—written in English, evidently in order to
safeguard her from the peril of casual perusal. During a walk
through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg dock,* a bundle of
papers falling from an attic window had knocked him down.
Two Lascar sailors’ at once helped him to his feet, but before the
ambulance could reach him he was dead. Physicians found no
adequate cause for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a
weakened constitution.

I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will
never leave me till I, too, am at rest; “accidentally” or otherwise.
Persuading the widow that my connexion with her husband’s
“technical matters” was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript,
I bore the document away and began to read it on the London
boat. It was a simple, rambling thing—a naive sailor’s effort at a
post-facto diary-—and strove to recall day by day that last awful
voyage. I cannot attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its
cloudiness and redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to shew
why the sound of the water against the vessel’s sides became so
unendurable to me that I stopped my ears with cotton.

Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he
saw the city and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again
when I think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in
time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from el-
der stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favoured by a
nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them on the world
whenever another earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone

city again to the sun and air.

Johansen’s voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-
admiralty. The Emma, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on Feb-
ruary 20th, and had felt the full force of that earthquake-born

tempest which must have heaved up from the sea-bottom the ~

horrors that filled men’s dreams. Once more under control, the
ship was making good progress when held up by the Alert on
March 22nd, and I could feel the mate’s regret as he wrote of her
bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the
Alert he speaks with significant horror. There was some pecu-

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 165

liarly abominable quality about them which made their destruc-
tion seem almost a duty, and Johansen shews ingenuous wonder
at the charge of ruthlessness brought against his party during the
proceedings of the court of inquiry. Then, driven ahead by cu-
riosity in their caprured yacht under Johansen’s command.
the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea, and in
S. Latitude 47° 9°, W. Longitude 126° 43” come upon a coast-
line of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean masonr
which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth's
Supreme terror—the nightmare corpse-city..of' R’lyeh,-that was
built in measureless acons behind history: bythe vast, doathsome
shapes that seeped down-from-the dark stars, Thereslay great
Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults: and send-
ing out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread
fear to the dreams of the sensitive and called imperiously to the
faithful to comeion a pilgrimage of liberation and restoration..All
this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon ‘s
enough! ~
I suppose that only a single mountain- i
monolith-crowried citadel whereon great ‘Cthulhu me, eee
actually emerged from the waters. When I think of the extent of
all that may be brooding down there I-almost wish to kill myself
forthwith. Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic :
majesty of this dripping Babylon of elder daemons and must
have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of
any sane planet! Awe atthe unbelievable size of the greenish
stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven monolith
and at the stupéfying identity of the colossal statues and bas-
reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the Alert, is
poignantly visible in every line of the mate’s frightened descrip-
Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen: achieved
something very close to it when he spoke of the city; for instead
of describing any definite ‘structure or building; he dwells onl
on broad impressions of vast angles and stone surfaces—surfaces

too great to belong to any thing right or proper for this earth,

and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his
tall about angles| because it suggests something Wilcox had told



--- Page 16 ---
166 - H. P. LOVECRAFT

me of his awful dreams. He has said that the geometry of the
dream-place he saw was abnormal, non-Euclidean," and loath-
somely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours.
Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at
the terrible reality. :

Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this
monstrous Acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan
oozy blocks which could have been no mortal staircase. The very
sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polar-
ising miasma welling out from this sea-soaked perversion, and
twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily
elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance shewed con-
cavity after the first shewed convexity.

Something very like fright had come over all the explorers be-
fore anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was
seen. Each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the
others, and it was only half-heartedly that they searched—
vainly, as it proved—tor some portable souvenir to bear away.

It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of
the monolith and shouted of what he had found. The rest fol-
lowed him,.and looked curiously at the immense carved door
with the now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief. It was, Johansen
said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that it was a door be-
cause of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though
they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slant-
wise like an outside cellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the
geometry of the-place was all wrong. One could not be sure that
the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative posi-
tion of everything else seemed phantasmally variable.

Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result.
Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing
each point separately as he went. He climbed interminably along
the grotesque stone moulding—that is, one would call it climb-
ing if the thing was not after all horizontal—and the men won-
dered how any door in the universe could be so vast. Then, very
softly and slowly, the acre-great panel began to give inward at
the top; and they saw that it was balanced. Donovan slid or
somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and re-

THE CALL OF CTHULHU. 167

joined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of
the monstrously carven portal. In this phantasy of prismatic dis-
tortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the
rules of matter and perspective seemed upset. ;
"The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. That
tenebrousness was indeed a positive quality; for it obscured
such parts of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and
actually burst forth like smoke from its aeon-long imprisonment,
visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and
gibbous sky on flapping membraneous wings. The odour arising
from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the
quick-eared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound
down there. Everyone listened, and everyone was listening
still when It lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly
squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity through the black door-
way into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.

Poor Johansen’s handwriting almost gave out when he wrote
of this. Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two
perished of pure fright in that accursed instant. The Thing can-
not be described—there is no language for such abysms of
shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of
all matter, force, and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stum-
bled. God! What wonder that across the earth a great architect
went mad, and poor Wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic
instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the
stars, had awaked to claim his own. The stars were right again,
and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design, a band of in-
nocent sailors had done by accident. After vigintillions of years
great Cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight.

Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody
turned. God rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. They
were Donovan, Guerrera, and Angstrom. Parker slipped as: the
other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas of
green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was
swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn’t have been
there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse.
So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled des-
perately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped



--- Page 17 ---
168 H. P. LOVECRAFT

down the slimy stones and hesitated floundering at the edge of
the water.

Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the
departure of all hands for the shore; and it was the'work of only
a few moments of feverish rushing up'and down between wheel
and engines to get the Alert under way. Slowly, amidst the dis-
torted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the
lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that
was not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gib-
bered like Polypheme cursing. the fleeing ship of Odysseus.
Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid
greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast wave-
raising strokes of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went
mad,” laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till
death found him one night in the cabin whilst Johansen was
wandering deliriously. ;

But Johansen had not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing
could surely overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he re-
solved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full
speed, ran lightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel. There
was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as
the steam mounted. higher and higher the brave Norwegian
drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose
above the unclean froth like the stern of a daemon galleon. The
awful squid-head. with writhing feelers came nearly up to the
bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly,
There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy riasti-
ness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened

graves, and a sound that the chronicler would not put on paper.
For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid: and blinding
green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething
astern; where—God in heaven!—the scattered plasticity of that
nameless sky-spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful
original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the
Alert gained impetus from its mounting steam.

‘That was all. After that Johansen only brooded over the idol
in the cabin and attended to a few matters of food for himself
and the laughing maniac by his side. He did not try to navigate

THE CALL OF CTHULHU 169

after the first bold flight, for the reaction had taken something
out pf his soul. Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gather-
ing of the clouds about his consciousness. There is'a sense of
spectral whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of dizzying
rides through reeling universes on a comet’s tail, and of hysteri-
cal plunges from the pit to the moon and from the moon back
again to the pit, all livened by a cachinnating chorus of the dis
torted, hilarious elder gods and the green, bat-winged mocking
imps of Tartarus. ;

Out of that dream came rescue—the Vigilant, the vice-
admiralty court, the streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage
back home to the old house by the Egeberg. He could not tell
they would think him mad. He would write of what he knew be-
fore death came}-but his wife must not guess. Death would be a
boon if only it could blot out the memories. :

; That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the
tin box beside thie bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell.
With it shall go this record of mine—this test of my own sanity,
wherein is piecéd together that which I hope may never be -
pieced together again. I have looked upon all that the universe
has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flow-

_ ers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me. But I do not. .
think my life will be long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen

went, so I shall go. I know too much, and the cult still lives.
Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone

which has shieldéd him since the sun was young. His accursed

city is sunken onée more, for the Vigilant sailed over the spot af-

ter the April stom; but his ministers on earth still bellow and

prance and slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places.

‘He must have béen trapped by the sinking whilst within his

black abyss, or the world would by now be screaming with
fright and frenzy. Who knows the end? What has risen may sink,
and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomeness waits and dreams 7
the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men. A
time will come—but J must not and cannot think! Let ime pray
that, if I do not stirvive this manuscript, my executors may put
caution before au lacity and see that it meets no other eye.
{



