--- Page 1 ---
Circumstance, Influence,

Composition, Revision

MARY SHELLEY
Introduction to Frankenstein, Third Edition (1831)t

‘The Publishers of the Standard Novels, in selecting ‘Frankenstein’

for one of their series, expressed a wish that { should furnish them

with some account of the origin of the story. Lam the more willing to

comply, because I shall thus give a general answer to the question, so

yery frequently asked me— ‘Tow I, then a young girl, came to think

of, and to dilate upon, so very hideous an idea?’ It is true that | am

very averse to bringing myself forward in print; but as my account

will only appear as an appendage to a former production, and as it

will be confined to such topics as have connection with my author-

ship alone, I can scarcely accuse myself of a personal intrusion.

Ik is not singular that, as the daughter of two persons of distin-

guished literary celebrity, 1 should very carly in life have thought of:
writing. As a child I scribbled; and my favourite pastime, during the

hours given me for recreation, was ¢o ‘write stories.” Still I had a

dearer pleasure than this, which was the formation of castles in the‘
air—the indulging in waking dreams—the following up trains of
thought, which had for their subject the formation of a succession of
imaginary incidents. My dreams were at once more fantastic and
agreeable than my writings. In the latter I was a close imitator—
rather doing as others had done, than putting down the suggestions

of my own mind, What J wrote was intended at least for one other
eye—1my childhood’s companion and friend; but my dreams were all

-my own; I accounted for them to nobody; they were my refuge when

anpoyed—my dearest pleasure when free.

{ lived principally in the country as a girl, and passed a consider-
able time in Scotland. 1 made occasional visits to the more pictur-
esque parts; but my habitual residence was on the blank and dreary

} From Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus (London: Henry Colburn and Richard
Bentley, 1831), v-xii. :

165



--- Page 2 ---
166 : Mary Sueitey

northern shores of the Tay, near Dundee, Blank and dreary on ret-
rospection I call them; they were not so to me then. They wore the
eyry of freedom, and the pleasant region where unheeded | could
commune with the creatures of my fancy. 1 wrote then—but in a
most common-place style. It was beneath the trees of the ground

belonging to our house, or on the bleak sides of the woodless moun.

tains neat, that my true compositions, the airy flights of my ima
nation, were born and fostered, I did not make myself the ‘eroin
of my tales.-Life appeared to me too common-place an affair ‘
regarded myself. I could not figuire to myself that romantic wo or
wonderful events would ever be my lot; but I was not confined to
my own identity, and I could people the hours with creations far
more interesting to me at that age, than my own sensations
After this my life became busier, and reality stood in place of fic-
tion. My husband, however, was, from the first, very anxious that |
should prove myself worthy of my parentage, and enrol myself on
the page of fame. He was for ever inciting me to obtain literay repu-
tation, which even on my own part I cared for then, thou h Sines I
have become infinitely indifferent to it. At this time he desired that
I should write, not so much with the idea that I could produce an
thing worthy of notice, but that he might himself judge how far 1
possessed the promise of better things hereafter. Still I did nothin
‘Travelling, and the cares of a family, occupied my time; and study,
in the way of reading, or improving my ideas in communication with
his far more cultivated mind, was all of literary employr I
engaged my attention. employment
In the summer of 1816, we visited Switzerland, and became th
neighbours of Lord Byron. At first we spent our pleasant hours on
the lake, or wandering on its shores; and Lord Byron, who ‘
writing the third canto of Childe Harold, was the only one among
us who put his thoughts upon paper. These, as he brought them
successively to us, clothed in all the light and harmony of poetr:
seemed to stamp as divine the glories of heaven and eart. . hi ‘
influences we partook with him. me Ness
But it proved a wet, ungenial summer, and incessant rain often
confined us for days to the house. Some volumes of ghost stories.
translated from the German into French, fell into our hands. Ther :
was the History of the Inconstant Lover, who, when he thou ht to
clasp the bride to whom he had pledged his ‘vows found himself
in the arms of the pale ghost of her whom he had deserted The
was the tale of the sinful founder of his race, whose miserable doom
it was to bestow the kiss of death on all the younger sons of his fated
house, just when they reached the age of promise, His gigantic, shad-
owy form, clothed like the ghost in Hamlet, in complete armour, but
with the beaver up, was seen at midnight, by the moon’s fitfu beams,

INTRODUCTION To FRANKENSTEIN (1831) 167

to advance slowly along the gloomy avenue. The shape was lost
beneath the shadow of the castle walls; but soon a gate swung back,
a step was heard, the door of the chamber opened, and he advanced
to the couch of the blooming youths, cradled in. healthy sleep. Eter-
nal sorrow sat upon his face as he bent down and kissed the forehead
of the boys, who from that hour withered like flowers snapt upon the
stalk, I have not seen these stories since then; but their incidents

are as fresh in my mind as if I had read them yesterday.

‘We will each write a ghost story, said Lord Byron; and his propo-
sition was acceded to. There were four of us. The noble author
began a tale, a fragment of which he printed at the end of his poem
of Mazeppa. Shelley, more apt to embody ideas and sentiments in
the radiance of brilliant imagery, and in the music of the most melo-
dious verse that adorns our language, than to invent the machinery
of a story, commenced one founded on the experiences of his early

-ife. Poor Polidori had some terrible idea about a skull-headed lady,

who was-so punished for peeping through a key-hole—what to see
I forget—something very shocking and wrong of course; but when
she was reduced to a worse condition than the renowned Tom of
Coventry, he did not know what to do with her, and was obliged to
despatch her to the tomb of the Capulets, the only place for which
she was fitted. The illustrious poets also, annoyed by the platitude of
prose, speedily relinquished their uncongenial task.

I busied myself to think of a story,—a story to rival those which
had excited us to this task. One which would speak to the mysteri-
ous fears of our nature, and awaken thrilling horror—one to make
the reader dread to look rownd, to curdle the blood, and quicken the
beatings-of the heart. If I did not accomplish these things, my ghost
story would be unworthy of its name. I thought and pondered—-
vainly, I felt that blank incapability of invention which is the great-
est misery of authorship, when dull Nothing replies to our anxious
invocations. Have you thought of a story? | was asked each morning,
and each morning I was forced to reply with a mortifying negative.

Every thing must have a beginning, to speak. in Sanchean phrase;

~ and that beginning must be linked to something that went before.

‘The Hindoos give the world an elephant to support it, but they make
the elephant stand upon a tortoise. Invention, it must be humbly
admitted, does not consist in creating out of void, but out of chaos;
the materials must, in the first place, be afforded; it can give form to
dark, shapeless substances, but cannot bring into being the sub-
stance itself. In all matters of discovery and invention, even of those
that appertain to the imagination, we are continually reminded of
the story of Columbus and his egg. Invention consists in the capacity

= of seizing on the capabilities of a subject, and in the power of mould-

ing and fashioning ideas suggested to it.



--- Page 3 ---
168 Mary SHELLEY

Many and long were the conversations between Lord Byron and
Shelley, to which I was a devout but nearly silent listener. During one
of these, various philosophical doctrines were discussed, and among
others the nature of the principle of life, and whether there was any

probability of its ever being discovered and communicated. They |

talked of the experiments of Dr. Darwin, (I speak not of what the Doc-
tor really did, or said that he did, but, as more to my purpose, of what
was then spoken of as having been done by him,) who preserved a
piece of vermicelli in a glass case, till by some extraordinary means it
began to move with voluntary motion. Not thus, after all, would life be
given. Perhaps a corpse would be re-animated; galvanisin had given
token of such things: perhaps the component parts of a creature might
be manufactured, brought together, and endued with vital warmth.
Night waned upon this talk, and even the witching hour had gone
by, before we retired to rest. When I placed my head on my pillow, I
did not sleep, nor could I be said to think. My imagination, unbid-
den, possessed and guided me, gifting the successive images that
arose in my mind with a vividness far beyond the usual bounds of
reverie. I saw—-with shut eyes, but acute mental vision,—I saw the
pale student of unhallowed arts kneeling beside the thing he had
put together. I saw the hideous phantasm of a man stretched out,
and then, on the working of some powerful engine, show signs of
life, and stir with an uneasy, half vital motion. Frightfil must it be;
for supremely frightful would be the effect of any human endeavour
to mock the stupendous mechanism of the Creator of the world. His
success would terrify the artist; he would rush away from his odious
handy-work, horror-stricken. He would hope that, left to itself, the
slight spark of life which he had communicated would fade; that
this thing, which had received such imperfect animation, would
subside into dead matter; and he might sleep in the belief that the
silence of the grave would quench for ever the transient existence of
the hideous corpse which he had looked upon as the cradle of life.
He sleeps; but he is awakened; he opens his eyes; behold the horrid
thing stands at his bedside, opening his curtains, and looking on
him with yellow, watery, but speculative eyes. :
1 opened mine in terror. The idea so possessed my mind, that a
thrill of fear ran through me, and I wished to exchange the ghastly
image of my fancy for the realities around. I see them still; the very
room, the dark parquet, the closed shutters, with the moonlight
struggling through, and the sense I had that the glassy lake and
white high Alps were beyond. | could not so easily get rid of my hid-
eous phantom; still it haunted me. I must try tothink of something
else. I recurred to my ghost story,—my tiresome unlucky ghost story!
O! if I could only contrive one which would frighten my reader as I
myself had been frightened that night!

Lerrer Preracnp to Tue Vampyre (1819) 169

Swift as light arid as cheering was the idea that broke in upon
me, ‘I have found it! What terrified me will terrify others; and I
need only describe the spectre which had haunted my midnight pil-
low’ On the morrow I announced that I had thought of a story. I
began that day with the words, It was on a dreary night of November,
making only a transcript of the grim terrors of my waking dream,

At first I thought but of a few pages—of a short tale; but Shelley
urged me to develope the idea at greater length. | certainly did not
owe the suggestion of one incident, nor scarcely of one train of feel-
ing, to my husband, and yet but for his incitement, it would never
have taken the form in which it was presented to the world. From
this declaration I must except the preface. As far as I can recollect,
it was entirely written by him. .

And now, once again, I bid my hideous progeny go forth and pros-
per. I have an affection for it, for it was the offspring of happy days,
when death and grief were but words, which found no true echo in
my heart. Its several pages speak of many a walk, many a drive, and
many a conversation, when I was not alone; and my companion was
one who, in this world, I shall never see more. But this is for myself;
my readers have nothing to do with these associations.

I will add but one word as to the alterations I have made. They are
principally those of style. | have changed no portion of the story, nor
introduced any new ideas or circumstances. I have mended the lan-
guage where it was so bald as to interfere with the interest of the
narrative; and these changes occur almost exclusively in the begin-

such parts as are mere adjuncts to the story, leaving the core and
substance of it untouched. ,

~ MWS.
London, October 15, 1831

y

JOHN WILLIAM POLIDORI
Letter Prefaced to The Vampyre (1819)

It appears that one evening Lord B., Mr. P. B. Shelly, the two ladies
and the gentleman before alluded to,' after having per Ger-

ghost stories; when his lordshi ifig recited the beginning of
Christabel, then un isht@d, the whole took so strong a hold of Mr.
Shelly’s miadsthat he suddenly started up and ran out of the room.
Thé physician and Lord Byron followed, and discovered him leaning

1. Mary Shelley, Claire Clairmont, and Polidori himself.

ning of the first volume. Throughout they are entirely confined to *

man work, which was entitled Phantasma; 5 began relating -



