--- Page 1 ---
Mary Shelley, Frankenstein, or The Modern Prometheus
(1818) - excerpts

Victor Frankenstein: “Natural philosophy* is the genius* that has
regulated my fate; I desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those
facts which led to my predilection for that science. When I was
thirteen years of age, we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths
near Thonon; the inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain a
day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a volume of the
works of Cornelius Agrippa*. I opened it with apathy; the theory
which he attempts to demonstrate, and the wonderful facts which he
relates, soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm.

A new light seemed to dawn upon my mind; and, bounding with joy, I
communicated my discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly
at the titlepage of my book and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear
Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.”

If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to
me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded, and that
a modern system of science had been introduced, which possessed
much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the
latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and
practical; under such circumstances, I should certainty have thrown
Agrippa aside, and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was,
by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even
possible, that the train of my ideas would never have received the
fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had
taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was acquainted
with its contents; and I continued to read with the greatest avidity.

When I returned home, my first care was to procure the whole works
of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus* and Albertus Magnus*. I
read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they
appeared to me treasures known to few besides myself. I have
described myself as always having been embued with a fervent
longing to penetrate the secrets of nature. In spite of the intense
labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always
came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton
is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside
the great and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of his successors in
each branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted,
appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions, as tyros engaged in the
same pursuit.


--- Page 2 ---
The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him, and was
acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher
knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but her
immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might
dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause,
causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown
to him. I had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that
seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and
rashly and ignorantly I had repined. But here were books, and here
were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more. | took their
word for all that they averred, and I became their disciple. It may
appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but
while I followed the routine of education in the schools of Geneva, I
was, to a great degree, self taught with regard to my favourite studies.
My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a child’s
blindness, added to a student’s thirst for knowledge. Under the
guidance of my new preceptors, I entered with the greatest diligence
into the search of the philosopher’s stone* and the elixir of life*; but
the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. Wealth was an
inferior object; but what glory would attend the discovery, if I could
banish disease from the human frame, and render man
invulnerable to any but a violent death!” (chap.2)

Notes:

Natural philosophy: eighteenth century term for the study of nature. The
main tenet says that everything in the universe is alive and is connected to
everything else. Natural philosophy contributed considerably to the study
of magnetism, galvanism, and electricity.

genius: attendant spirit.

Cornelius Agrippa: Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa (1486-1535), German
physician and author of De Occulta Philosophia (1531) and De Vanitate
Scientiarum (1530). In these works, Agrippa maintains that the study of
magic allows one to know God and the universe.

Paracelsus: Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim (1486-1541), a Swiss
alchemist, physician, and magician.

Albertus Magnus: (1193-1280) German Dominican monk and theologian,
one of Percy Shelley’s favorite philosophers.

philosopher’s stone: sought by medieval alchemists, the secret formula that
would transform other metals into gold or silver.

elixir of life: a potion that alchemists believed would lengthen life
indefinitely.


--- Page 3 ---
Pr. Wadman: “The ancient teachers of this science,” said he, “promised
impossibilities, and performed nothing. The modern masters
promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted,
and that the elixir of life is a chimera. But these philosophers,
whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to
pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed
miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature, and show
how she works in her hiding places. They ascend into the
heavens: they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the
nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost
unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic
the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own
shadows.” (chap.3)

Victor Frankenstein: “One of the phenomena which had peculiarly
attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and,
indeed, any animal endued with life. Whence, I often asked myself, did
the principle of life proceed? It was a bold question, and one which
has ever been considered as a mystery; yet with how many things are
we upon the brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or
carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. I revolved these
circumstances in my mind, and determined thenceforth to apply
myself more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy
which relate to physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost
supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have
been irksome, and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life,
we must first have recourse to death. | became acquainted with the
science of anatomy: but this was not sufficient; I must also observe the
natural decay and corruption of the human body. In my education my
father had taken the greatest precautions that my mind should be
impressed with no supernatural horrors. | do not ever remember to
have trembled at a tale of superstition, or to have feared the
apparition of a spirit. Darkness had no effect upon my fancy; and a
churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life,
which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food
for the worm. Now I was led to examine the cause and progress of this
decay, and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and charnel-
houses. My attention was fixed upon every object the most
insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. I saw how the fine
form of man was degraded and wasted; I beheld the corruption of
death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I saw how the worm
inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and


--- Page 4 ---
analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change
from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this
darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and
wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the
immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised, that
among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries
towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover
so astonishing a secret.

Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does
not more certainly shine in the heavens, than that which I now affirm
is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights of
incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of
generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of
bestowing animation upon lifeless matter.” (chap.4)

RK

Victor Frankenstein: “Winter, spring, and summer passed away
during my labours; but I did not watch the blossom or the
expanding leaves—sights which before always yielded me
supreme delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation.
The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a
close; and now every day showed me more plainly how well I had
succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I
appeared rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or
any other unwholesome trade, than an artist occupied by his favourite
employment. Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I
became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me,
and I shunned my fellow-creatures as if I had been guilty of a
crime.” (chap.4)

Victor Frankenstein: “I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some
distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed. He bounded
over the crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution;
his stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. I
was troubled: a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize
me; but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I
perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and
abhorred!) that it was the wretch whom I had created. I trembled with
rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with
him in mortal combat. He approached; his countenance bespoke bitter
anguish, combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly


--- Page 5 ---
ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely
observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance,
and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of
furious detestation and contempt.

“Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? and do not you fear
the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
Begone, vile insect! or rather, stay, that I may trample you to dust!
and, oh! that I could, with the extinction of your miserable existence,
restore those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”

“I expected this reception,” said the daemon. “All men hate the
wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all
living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with life?
Do your duty towards me, and | will do mine towards you and the
rest of mankind. If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave
them and you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death,
until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.”

“Abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are too
mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! you reproach me
with your creation; come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark
which I so negligently bestowed.”

My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another. He
easily eluded me and said— “Be calm! I entreat you to hear me, before
you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered
enough, that you seek to increase my misery? Life, although it may
only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it.
Remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my height
is superior to thine; my joints more supple. But I will not be tempted
to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature, and I will be
even mild and docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also
perform thy part, the which thou owest me. Oh, Frankenstein, be not
equitable to every other, and trample upon me alone, to whom
thy justice, and even thy clemency and affection, is most due.
Remember, that I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam; but I am
rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed.
Every where I see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I
was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me
happy, and I shall again be virtuous.”

“Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community between you


--- Page 6 ---
and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in
which one must fall.”

“How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a
favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness
and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein: I was benevolent; my
soul glowed with love and humanity: but am I not alone,
miserably alone. You, my creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather
from your fellow-creatures, who owe me nothing? they spurn and
hate me. The desert mountains and dreary glaciers are my refuge. I
have wandered here many days; the caves of ice, which I only do not
fear, are a dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not
grudge. These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder to me than your
fellow-beings. If the multitude of mankind knew of my existence, they
would do as you do, and arm themselves for my destruction. Shall I
not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no terms with my
enemies. I am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness. Yet it
is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an evil
which it only remains for you to make so great, that not only you and
your family, but thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in the
whirlwinds of its rage. Let your compassion be moved, and do not
disdain me. Listen to my tale: when you have heard that, abandon or
commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The
guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in
their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me,
Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder; and yet you would, with a
satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal
justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me: listen to me, and then, if
you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.” (chap.10)


