--- Page 1 ---
THE NOVEL

It is not my intention here to defend the short novel that follows.
Quite the opposite, in fact, as the ideas I am going to try to get across
would, if anything, lead to criticism of the kind of psychological
study I have undertaken in Pierre et Jean.

I want to deal with the Novel in general.

I am not alone in being accused of the same thing by the same
critics* each time a new book appears.

Amidst complimentary phrases, I regularly find this one, always
penned by the same people: “The great flaw in this work is that it is
not a novel in the proper sense of the word.’

One could reply using the same argument: ‘The great flaw in this
writer who flatters me with his judgement, is that he is not a critic.’

So what are the essential qualities of a critic?

Being wholly objective, without preconceived opinions, ideas
from any particular school, ties with any family of artists, a critic
must understand, distinguish, and explain all the widely contrasting
tendencies, the most conflicting temperaments, and accept the most
diverse artistic experiments.

Thus the critic who, after Manon Lescaut, Paul et Virginie, Don
Quixote, Les Liaisons dangereuses, Werther, Elective Affinities, Clarissa
Harlowe, Emile, Candide, Cing-Mars, René, Les Trois Mousquetaires,
Mauprat, Le Pere Goriot, La Cousine Bette, Colomba, Le Rouge et le
noir, Mademoiselle de Maupin, Notre-Dame de Paris, Salammbé,
Madame Bovary, Adolphe, M. de Camors, L’Assommoir, Sapho, etc.,*
still dares to write, “This is a novel, that is not’, seems to me to be
endowed with a perspicacity remarkably like incompetence.

Usually this critic understands by the term ‘novel’ a more or less
plausible adventure, arranged like a play in three acts, the first con-
taining the exposition, the second the action, and the third the
denouement.

This kind of structure is perfectly acceptable provided that all
others are equally so.

Is there a set of rules for writing a novel, any deviation from which
would require a story to bear a different name?

If Don Quixote is a novel, is Le Rouge et le noir one as well? If


--- Page 2 ---
4 The Novel

Monte-Cristo* is a novel, what about L’Assommoir? Is it possible to
make a comparison between Goethe’s Elective Affinities, Dumas’s
Les Trois Mousquetaires, Flaubert’s Madame Bovary, Monsieur O.
Feuillet’s M1. de Camors, and Zola’s Germinal?* Which of these
works is a novel? What are these famous rules? Where do they
originate from? Who made them? By virtue of what principle, whose
authority, and what reasoning?

It seems, however, that these critics know for certain, beyond any
doubt, what constitutes a novel and what distinguishes it from
another novel which isn’t a novel. This quite simply means that,
without producing anything themselves, they are enlisted into a
school and reject, as novelists themselves do, any works conceived
and executed outside their chosen aesthetic mode.

An intelligent critic should, on the contrary, look for everything
that is least like any novels already written and encourage young
writers to try out new ways wherever possible.

All writers, Victor Hugo as much as M. Zola,* have persistently
demanded the absolute, unquestionable right to write, that is to
imagine or observe, in accordance with their personal conception of
art. Talent comes from originality, which is a special way of thinking,
seeing, understanding, and judging. The critic who thus claims to
define the Novel according to his preconceptions, based on the
novels he likes, and to establish inflexible rules governing its com-
position, will always come up against an artistic temperament intro-
ducing some new style. A critic really worthy of the name should
simply be an unbiased analyst, without preferences, detached, and,
like an expert in paintings, should only assess the artistic value of the
work of art submitted to him. His open-minded understanding
should so override his own personality that he can bring to our
attention and praise books which as a man he dislikes, but as a judge
must comprehend.

But the majority of critics are merely readers, which is why they
almost always take our work apart for the wrong reasons or congratu-
late us without reservation or moderation.

The reader, who only wants a book to satisfy the natural inclina-
tion of his mind, just asks that the writer caters for his predominant
taste, and will invariably call a work or passage remarkable or well
written when it engages his own imagination, whether it be ideal-
istic, cheerful, licentious, sad, dreamy, or positive.


--- Page 3 ---
The Novel 5

In short, the reading-public is made up of many groups crying out
to us:

‘Console me.’

‘Amuse me.’

‘Make me sad.’

‘Move me.’

‘Make me dream.’

‘Make me laugh.’

‘Make me shudder.’

‘Make me cry.’

‘Make me think.’

Only a select few minds ask the artist: ‘Create something beauti-
ful, in the form that best suits you and according to your own
temperament.’

The artist tries, and either succeeds or fails.

The critic should only judge the outcome of what the author has
tried to do; and it’s none of his business to deal with the aims in
themselves.

This has already been written thousands of times. It will always
have to be repeated.

So after the literary schools that were intent on giving us dis-
torted, superhuman, poetic, sentimental, charming, or magnificent
visions of life, there came a realist or naturalist school claiming to
show us the truth, nothing but the truth, the whole truth.

One must accept these utterly different art theories with equal
interest and judge the works they produce exclusively from the point
of view of their artistic worth, accepting a priori the general ideas
from which they were born.

To contest an author’s right to create a poetic or realistic work is
to want to force him to alter his temperament, to challenge his ori-
ginality, to deny him the use of the eyes and intelligence nature has
given him.

To find fault with him for seeing things as beautiful or ugly, minor
or epic, appealing or sinister, is to find fault with him for distorting
things in some way and for not seeing them as we do.

Let the writer be free to understand, observe, and create as he sees
fit, as long as he is an artist. When judging an idealist, let us be
carried away poetically and then show him that his dream is
mediocre, banal, not fantastic or lavish enough. But when judging a


--- Page 4 ---
6 The Novel

naturalist, let us show him how truth in real life differs from the
truth in his book.

It is obvious that such contrasting schools have had to use radic-
ally different methods of composition.

The novelist who transforms the undisputed, stark, and
unpleasant truth in order to derive from it an exceptional and
charming story must, without worrying too much about plausibil-
ity, manipulate events as he chooses, preparing and arranging
them to please, inspire, or move the reader. The framework of his
novel is merely a series of ingenious combinations leading skilfully
to the denouement. The incidents are structured, building up to
the climax and the sense of an ending which is a supreme and
decisive event, providing a satisfying answer to all the questions
raised at the outset, closing off the reader’s need to know, and
finishing off the story so completely that he is not left wondering
what will happen the next day to even the most captivating of
characters.

By contrast, the novelist who claims to present us with an exact
replica of life must go to lengths to avoid linking any events that
would seem exceptional. His aim is not to tell us a story, to entertain
us, or to appeal to our emotions, but rather to force us to think and to
understand the hidden and profound meaning of events. Through
having observed and contemplated, he looks at the universe, things,
facts, and mankind in a way that is his own and is a result of his
observation and reflection. It is this personal view of the world that
he is attempting to communicate to us by reproducing it in a book.
In order to move the reader in the same way that he himself has been
moved by the spectacle of life, he must reproduce it before our eyes
with scrupulous accuracy. He must therefore put together his work
in such a skilful, disguised, and apparently uncontrived manner that
it is impossible to discern or identify the plan and discover his
intentions.

Instead of plotting a story and making it unfold in a compelling
way to the very end, he will take his character or characters at a
certain point in their lives and lead them from one stage to the next
through a set of natural transitions. In this way, he will demonstrate
sometimes how people change when subject to circumstances in
which they find themselves, sometimes how feelings and passions
develop, how people love or hate, the conflicts within any social


--- Page 5 ---
The Novel 7

world in the intersections of bourgeois, financial, family, and political
interests.

The skill of his plan will not therefore consist in emotion or
charm, in an enthralling opening or dramatic catastrophe, but in the
inventive grouping of changeless little facts out of which the real
meaning of the work will emerge. If he is to put across in three
hundred pages ten years of someone’s life to show what its specific
and characteristic significance has been amongst all those other lives
lived around it, he must know how to eliminate from the innumer-
able trivial daily events all those that are of no use to him, and to
highlight, in a special way, all those that would otherwise have passed
unnoticed by the less perceptive observer and which give the book its
meaning and value as a whole.

It can be seen that such a method of writing, so different from the
old method clearly visible to all, often throws critics, as they fail to
discern all the fine, hidden, almost invisible threads used by certain
modern artists in place of the single piece of string known as the
Plot.

In short, if yesterday’s Novelist selected and recounted life’s
crises, the critical states of the soul and mind, today’s Novelist writes
the history of heart, soul, and mind in their normal state. To create
his desired effect, that is, the feeling of simple reality, and to draw
from it the artistic teaching he wants, namely to reveal real con-
temporary man as he sees him, he must use nothing but facts that are
incontestably and consistently true.

But even if we look at things from the realist artist’s point of view,
we must examine and question their theory, which, it would seem,
can easily be summed up in these words: “The whole truth and
nothing but the truth.’

Their objective being to extract from certain unchanging and
common facts an underlying philosophical vision, they will often
have to modify events for the sake of plausibility and to the detri-
ment of truth, for “The true can sometimes lack verisimilitude.’*

The realist, if he is an artist, will not try to show us a banal
photograph of life, but to provide us with a vision that is at once more
complete, more startling, and more convincing than reality itself.

To recount everything would be impossible, for it would require at
least a volume a day to list the multitude of insignificant incidents
that fill our lives.


--- Page 6 ---
8 The Novel

So a choice has to be made—which is the first way in which the
theory of the whole truth is undermined.

Besides, life is made up of the most differing, unexpected, con-
flicting, ill-assorted things; it is brutal, incoherent, disjointed, full of
inexplicable, illogical, and contradictory disasters which can only be
classified under the heading ‘faits divers’ .*

This is why the artist, having chosen his theme, will select from
such a life cluttered with random and trivial events only those
characteristic details useful to his subject, and will reject all the rest
as superfluous.

Here is one example out of thousands: a considerable number of
people in the world die every day as a result of accidents. Yet can we
drop a roof tile on the main character’s head, or throw him under the
wheels of a carriage mid-story, on the pretext that accidents must be
taken into account?

Life leaves everything within the same perspective, hastens events
or drags them out indefinitely. Art, on the other hand, lies in fore-
thought and preparation, managing skilfully disguised transitions,
bringing to light essential events by literary skill alone while giving
others their due, depending on their significance, in order to create
the desired profound sense of special truth.

To create the real, therefore, amounts to giving a total illusion of
the real consistent with the normal logic of events, not in transcrib-
ing them slavishly in the haphazard way they occur.

I conclude from this that gifted Realists should really be called
Illusionists.

How childish, in fact, to believe in reality when each of us has our
own reality in our thoughts and bodily organs. The eyes, ears, sense
of smell, and different tastes of each of us create as many versions of
reality as there are men on earth. And our minds, which receive
instructions from these differently affected organs, interpret, ana-
lyse, and judge as if each of us belonged to an entirely different race.

So we each merely create for ourselves an illusion of the world
which may be poetic, sentimental, joyful, melancholy, sordid, or
sombre depending on our individual nature. And the writer’s only
mission is the faithful reproduction of this illusion using all the
known artistic methods at his disposal.

Illusion of beauty—a human convention! Illusion of ugliness—a
matter of opinion! Illusion of truth—never constant! Illusion of the


--- Page 7 ---
The Novel 9

vile—attractive to so many! The great artists are those that impose
their personal illusion on mankind.

So let us not fall out over any one theory, as each is merely the
generalized expression of a self-analysing temperament.

There are two theories in particular which have often been set
against each other rather than accepting the validity of both—that of
the purely psychological novel and that of the objective novel.* Advo-
cates of analysis call for the writer to focus his attention on revealing
the slightest development of a mind and all the most secret motives
that determine our actions, making the event itself of only secondary
importance. An event is the final destination, simply a milestone, the
pretext for the novel. According to them, these works, at the same
time exact and made up, where invention is indistinguishable from
observation, should be written in the same way that a philosopher
composes a book on psychology, revealing the most distant origin of
cause and effect, explaining all the reasons behind every desire, and
detecting every reaction of a soul driven by self-interest, passion, or
instinct.

On the other hand, advocates of objectivity (what a ghastly word!)
aspire to giving us an exact representation of what takes place in life,
taking care to avoid any complicated explanation, any dissertation on
motives, and limit themselves to showing us people and events.

For them, the psychology should be hidden within the book as it is
in reality behind life’s events.

The novel conceived in this way gains in intensity, momentum of
narrative, colour, and dynamism.

So, instead of lengthy explanations of a character’s state of mind,
objective writers seek the action or gesture that such a state of mind
must inevitably make this man perform in a given situation. And
they make him behave in such a way throughout the book so that all
his acts and movements are reflections of his inner nature, his every
thought, his every wish or hesitation. Thus they hide the psychology
rather than display it, they make it the framework of the novel just as
the unseen skeleton makes up the framework of the human body.
The artist who paints our portrait* doesn’t display our skeleton.

It also seems to me that the novel executed in this way gains in
sincerity. First, it is more convincing, because the people we see in
action around us don’t tell us the motives that they act on.

Next we must take into account that if through observing men we


--- Page 8 ---
10 The Novel

can determine their nature accurately enough to foresee how they
will behave in almost every situation, if we can say with certainty,
‘Such a man with such a temperament, in such a case, will do this,’ it
doesn’t follow at all that we can determine, one by one, all the secret
stages of his thought processes, which are not our own, all the mys-
terious promptings of his instincts, which are not the same as ours,
all the complex impulses of his nature, the organs, nerves, blood, and
flesh of which are different from our own.

Whatever the genius of a feeble, gentle, passionless man who loves
nothing but knowledge and work, he will never be able to transport
himself completely enough into the heart and body of some strap-
ping and lively fellow, who is sensual, fierce, excited by every desire
and even by every vice, to understand and point out the most intim-
ate impulses and sensations of such a different individual, even if he
can anticipate and recount every act in his life perfectly well.

In short, the writer who goes in for pure psychology can only
substitute himself for all his characters in the various situations in
which he places them, because it is impossible for him to change his
own bodily organs, which are the only intermediaries between the
outer world and us, which impose their perceptions on us, determine
our sensitivity, and create in us a soul essentially different from all
those around us. We cannot avoid conveying some of our own vision
and knowledge of the world, acquired with the help of our senses,
our ideas on life, to each of the characters whose personal and
unknown being we claim to expose. We therefore always show our-
selves in the body of a king, an assassin, a thief, or an honest man, a
prostitute, a nun, a young girl, or a trader at her market stall, as we
are obliged to ask ourselves the following: ‘If J were a king, murderer,
thief, prostitute, nun, young girl, or market trader, what would J do,
how would / think, how would / react? And so we only diversify our
characters by changing the age, sex, social standing, and all the cir-
cumstances of our own life which nature has surrounded with an
impenetrable barrier of bodily organs.

The trick is not to let the reader recognize this se/f behind all the
various masks which serve to hide it.

But even if pure psychological analysis is questionable from the
point of view of complete accuracy, it can still give us works of art
that are as beautiful as any other.

Take the Symbolists today.* And why not? Their artistic vision is a


--- Page 9 ---
The Novel II

respectable one; and a particularly interesting thing about them is
that they understand and proclaim the extreme difficulty of art.

Indeed a man must be utterly crazy, utterly audacious, utterly
presumptuous, or utterly foolish to be writing at all these days! After
so many masters with such varied natures, such multifarious genius,
what remains to be done that hasn’t already been done? What
remains to be said that hasn’t been said already? Which of us can
boast of having written one page, or even a sentence, which cannot
be found somewhere else in a similar form? When we read, we who
are so saturated in French writing that our whole body feels like a
paste made of words, do we ever find a line or thought that is un-
familiar, that we haven’t had at least a confused premonition about?

The man only concerned to keep his public entertained by time-
honoured means writes with confidence, in all the innocence of his
mediocrity, works intended for the ignorant masses with nothing
better to amuse themselves. But those weighed down by all the cen-
turies of past literature, whom nothing will satisfy, disgusted because
they dream of something better, for whom everything already seems
deflowered and whose own work always seems to them useless and
hackneyed, come to view the art of literature as something intangible
and mysterious, a few pages from the greatest master revealing only
the barest glimpse of it.

‘Twenty or so lines of verse or sentences jump out at us and thrill
us to the core like a startling revelation, but the following lines are
like any other lines, and the prose that flows on afterwards like any
other piece of prose.

Men of genius will almost certainly never experience such anguish
and torments, because within them lies an irresistible creative force.
They do not sit in judgement on themselves. The others, the rest of
us who are simply conscientious and tireless workers, can only
struggle against this invincible discouragement by unrelenting
effort.

‘Two men, by their simple and illuminating teachings, have given
me this strength to keep on trying: Louis Bouilhet* and Gustave
Flaubert.

If I now speak of them and myself, it is because their advice,
summarized in just a few lines, will perhaps be of use to some young
men with less self-confidence than one usually has when one starts to
write.


--- Page 10 ---
12 The Novel

Bouilhet, whom I grew close to first, about two years before
becoming good friends with Flaubert, by repeating to me that a
hundred lines or even fewer are enough to make the reputation of
an artist, if they are faultless and contain the essence of the talent
and originality even of a second-rate man, made me understand
that continual work and a thorough technical understanding can,
on a day of clear-thinking, strength, and spontaneity, together with
the happy union of a subject matching all the inclinations of our
own mind, give rise to a short, unique work as perfect as we can
produce.

It was after that that I understood that the most famous of writers
have hardly ever left more than a single volume, and that, above all,
we must have the good fortune to find and pick out from the multi-
tude of subjects from which we can choose, the one which will
engross every one of our capabilities, all our personal worth, and all
our artistic power.

Later on Flaubert, whom I used to see occasionally, took a liking
to me. I took the risk of sending him some of my literary efforts. He
was good enough to read them and responded: ‘I don’t know
whether you will have any talent. What you have brought me demon-
strates a certain amount of intelligence, but don’t forget this, young
man, that talent, as Chateaubriand* said, is only lengthy patience.
Work.’

I did work, and I often returned to him, realizing that he was fond
of me, because he jokingly took to calling me his disciple.

For seven years I did poetry, I did tales and short stories, even the
most appalling play. None of this has survived. The master read it
all, and then the following Sunday, over lunch, elaborated on his
criticisms and gradually drove home to me two or three principles
which summarize his long and patient teachings: ‘If you have origin-
ality’, he would say, ‘you must above all set it free; if you don’t, you
must acquire it.’

Talent is lengthy patience. It is a question of looking at anything
you want to express long enough and closely enough to discover in it
something that nobody else has seen before. In everything, there’s
something waiting to be discovered, simply because we tend to look
at the world only through the eyes of those who have preceded us.
The most insignificant thing contains something of the unknown.
Let’s find it. To describe a fire burning or a tree on a plain, let’s


--- Page 11 ---
The Novel 13

stand facing that fire and that tree until for us they no longer look
like any other tree or any other fire.

It is in this way that we become original.

Furthermore, having set down this truth that in the whole world
there are no two grains of sand, two flies, two hands, or two noses
which are exactly identical, he forced me to express in a few sen-
tences a being or an object in such a way as to define it clearly, to
distinguish it from any other being or any other objects of the same
race or kind.

‘When’, he said, ‘you pass by a shopkeeper sitting on his doorstep,
or a concierge smoking his pipe, next to a rank of carriages, show me
everything about that shopkeeper or concierge (how they look, how
they’re sitting, and in those outward physical details—thanks to the
acuteness of your images—their inner character), and in such a way
that I would never confuse them with any other shopkeeper or con-
cierge and, with a single word, how one cab horse is different from
the fifty others in front of it and behind it.’

I have developed elsewhere* his ideas on style. They are closely
related to the theory of observation I have just set out.

Whatever we want to say, there is only one word to express it, one
verb to animate it, and one adjective to qualify it. We must therefore
look for that word, verb, or adjective until we discover it and never
settle for anything less, never resort to sleights of hand, even inspired
ones, or the antics of language to sidestep the difficulty.

The subtlest of things can be conveyed and recorded by applying
this line by Boileau:* ‘The power of a word is discovered in its careful
positioning.’

There is no need for the bizarre, complicated, elaborate, and tor-
tuous vocabulary forced upon us today in the name of artistic style,*
in order to clarify all the finer points of thought. But we must dis-
tinguish with the utmost precision all the modifications in the value
of a word according to the position it occupies. Let’s have fewer
nouns, verbs, and adjectives with almost ungraspable meanings, but
more variety of phrases, diverse in their construction, ingeniously
divided up, full of sonorities and subtle rhythms. Let’s strive to be
excellent stylists rather than collectors of rare words.

It is, in fact, more difficult to handle a sentence as one wishes, to
make it say everything, even what is not expressed, to fill it with
inferences, secret and unformulated intentions, than to invent new


--- Page 12 ---
14 The Novel

expressions or to dig out of old, unknown books all the ones that are
no longer in use, have lost their meaning, and have become for us a
dead language.

The French language, moreover, is like pure water that mannered
writers have never succeeded in muddying and never will. Each
century has thrown into this limpid current its own fashions, preten-
tious archaisms, and affectations, with none of these useless attempts
and pathetic efforts staying afloat. The nature of this language is to
be clear, logical, and vigorous. It will not let itself be weakened,
obscured, or corrupted.

Those who these days use imagery without being careful about
abstract terms, those who make hail or rain fall upon the cleanliness
of window-panes, are fine ones to throw stones at the simplicity of
their fellow-writers! These will perhaps hit the writers who have a
body, but they will never touch simplicity, which does not.*

Guy de Maupassant
La Guillette,* Etretat, September 1887


