--- Page 20 ---
20 | MELVILLE’s SHORT NovELS

immovable, only. there was the faintest conceivable tremor of the
white attenuated mouth.
‘At-present I prefer to give no answer,” he said, and retired into
his. hermitage. .
_. It was rather weak in me I confess, but his manner on this occa-
- sion nettled me. Not only did there seem to lurk in it a certain dis-
dain, but his perverseness seemed ungrateful, considering the unde-
niable good usage and indulgence he had received from me. -
:, Again I sat ruminating what I should do. Mortified.as I was at his
behavior,-and resolved as I had been to dismiss. him. when I entered
my office, nevertheless I. strangely felt. something superstitious
knocking at my heart, and forbidding me to carry out my purpose,
and denouncing me for a villain if I dared to breathe one bitter word
against this forlornest of mankind. At last, familiarly. drawing my
chair behind his. screen, I sat down and said: “Bartleby, never mind
then. about: revealing your history;. but let me. entreat you, as a
friend, to.comply as far as may be with the usages of this office. Say
now you will help to examine papers tomorrow or next day: in short,
say now ‘that in a day or two you will begin to be a little reason-
able:—say.so, Bartleby.” os

“At present I would prefer not to be a little reasonable,” was his
mildly:cadaverous reply. ; a ;

Just:then the folding-doors opened, and Nippers approached. He
seemed suffering from an unusually bad night’s rest, induced by sev-
erer indigestion than common. He overheard those final words of
Bartleby. a ; :

“Prefer not, eh?” gritted Nippers—‘I’d prefer him, if I were you,
six,” addressing me—“I’d prefer him; I'd give him preferences, the
stubborn mule! What is it, six, pray, that he prefers not to. do now?”

Bartleby moved not a limb. ;
|. “Mx: Nippers,” said I, “I’d prefer that you would withdraw for the
present.” ., ; .

Somehow, of late I had got into the way of involuntary using
this word “prefer” upon all sorts of not exactly suitable occasions.
And I trembled to think that my contact with the scrivener had
already and seriously affected me in a mental way. And what fur-
ther and deeper aberration might it not yet produce? This appre-
hension had not been without efficacy in determining me to sum-
mary means. :

As Nippers, looking very sour and sulky, was departing, Turkey
blandly._ and deferentially approached.
--With-submission, sir,” said he, “yesterday I was thinking about
Bartleby here, and I think that if he would but prefer to take a quart
of good ale every day, it would do much towards mending him, and
enabling him to assist in examining his papers.”



--- Page 21 ---
BaRTLEBY, THE SCRIVENER 21

. So you have got the word too,” said I, slightly excited. “With sub-
mission, what word, sir,” asked Turkey, respectfully crowding him-
self into the contracted space behind the screen, and by so doing,
making me jostle the scrivener. “What word, sir?”

«. “I would prefer to be left alone here,” said Bartleby, as if offended.
at being mobbed in his privacy.

_ “That's the word, Turkey,” said I—“that’s it.” f

“Oh, prefer? oh yes—queer word. I ‘never use it myself. But, sir,
as I was saying, if he would but prefer—” .

. “Turkey,” interrupted I, “you will please withdraw.” “Oh certainly,
sir, if you prefer that I should.” an

As he opened the folding-door to retire, Nippers at his desk
caught a glimpse of me, and asked whether I would prefer to have
a certain paper copied on blue paper or white. He did not in the
least roguishly accent the word prefer. It was plain that it invohun-.
tarily rolled from ‘his tongue. I thought to myself, surely. I must get
rid of a demented man, who already has in some degree turned the
tongues, if not the heads of myself and clerks. But I thought it pru-
dent not to break the dismission at once. : :

The next day I noticed that Bartleby did nothing but stand at. his
window in his dead-wall revery. Upon asking him why he did not
write, he said that he had decided upon doing no more writing.

“Why, how now? what next?” exclaimed I, “do no more writing?”

“No more.”

“And what is the reason?” — :

“Do you not see the reason for yourself,” he indifferently replied.

I looked steadfastly at him, and perceived that his eyes. looked
dull and glazed. Instantly it occurred to me, that his unexampled
diligence in copying by his dim window for the first few weeks.of his
stay with me might have temporarily impaired his vision. ;

I was touched. I said something in condolence with him: I hinted
that of course he did wisely in abstaining from writing for a while;
and urged him to embrace that opportunity of taking wholesome
exercise in the open air. This, however, he did not do. A few days.
after this, my other clerks being absent, and being in a great hurry
to dispatch certain letters by the mail, I thought that, having
nothing else earthly to do, Bartleby would surely be less inflexible
than usual, and carry these letters to the post-office. But he blankly
declined. So, much to my inconvenience, I went myself. .

Still added days went by. Whether Bartleby’s eyes: improved or
not, I could not say. To all appearance, I thought they did. But when ©
I asked him if they did, he vouchsafed no answer. At all events, he
would do no copying. At last, in reply to my urgings, he informed me
that he had permanently given up copying.


--- Page 22 ---
22 MeELvILLE’s SHORT NOVELS

“What!” exclaimed I; “suppose your eyes should get entirely
well——better than ever before—would you not copy then?”

“I have given up copying,” he answered, and slid aside.

He remained as ever, a fixture in my chamber. Nay—if that were
possible—he became still more of a fixture than before. What was
to be done? He would do nothing in the office: why should he stay
there? In plain fact, he had now become a millstone® to me, not only
useless as a necklace, but afflictive to bear. Yet I was sorry ‘for him.
I speak less than truth when I say that, on his own account, he occa-
sioned me uneasiness. If he would but have named.a single relative
or friend, I would instantly have written, and urged their taking the
poor fellow away to some convenient retreat. But he seemed alone,
absolutely alone in the universe. A bit of wreck in the mid Atlantic.
At length, necessities connected with my business tyrannized over
all other considerations. Decently as I could, I told Bartleby that in
six days’ time he must unconditionally leave the office. I warned him
to ‘take measures, in the interval, for procuring some other abode. I
offered to assist him in this endeavor, if he himself would but take
the first step towards a removal. “And when you finally quit me,
Bartleby,” added I, “I shall see that you go not away entirely unpro-
vided..Six days from this hour, remember.”

At the expiration of that period, I peeped behind the screen, and
lo! Bartleby was there. : ms

‘I buttoned up my coat, balanced myself; advanced slowly towards
him, touched his shoulder, and said, “The time has come; you must
quit this place; I am sorry for you; here is money; but you must go.”

'“[ would prefer not,” he replied, with his back still towards me.

“You must.”

«He remained silent.

Now I had an unbounded confidence in this man’s. common hon-
esty.:He had frequently restored to me six pences and shillings care-
lessly dropped upon the floor, for 1 am apt to be very reckless in’
such shirt-button affairs. The proceeding then which followed will
not be deemed extraordinary.

“Bartleby,” said I, “I owe you twelve dollars on account; here are.
thirty-two; the odd twenty are yours.—Will you. take it?” and I
handed the bills towards him. !

But he made no motion. : 8
-.“T will leave them here then,” putting them under a weight on the
“table. Then. taking my hat and cane and going to the door I tran-

“quilly-turned and added—“After you have removed your things from -
oh these offices, Bartleby, you will of course lock the door—since every :

6. “Tt ‘were better for him that a millsts 8
millst i
drowned in the depth of the sea (Marthen ts cpneet about his neck, and that he were



--- Page 23 ---
Bartleby, THE SCRIVENER 23

one is now gone for the day but you—and if you please, slip your
key underneath the mat, so that I may have it in the morning. I shall
not see you again; so good-bye to you. If hereafter in your new place
of abode I can be of any service to you, do not fail to advise me by
letter. Good-bye, Bartleby, and fare you well.”

But he answered not a word; like the last column of some ruined.
temple, he remained standing mute and solitary in the middle of the
otherwise deserted room.

As I walked home in a pensive mood, my vanity got the better of my:
pity. I could not but highly plume myself on my masterly management
in-getting rid of Bartleby. Masterly I call it, and such it must appear to
any dispassionate thinker. The beauty of my. procedure seemed:to
consist in its perfect quietness.’ There was no vulgar bullying, no’
bravado of any sort, no choleric hectoring, and striding to and fro
across the apartment, jerking out vehement commands for Bartleby
to bundle himself off with his beggarly traps. .Nothing of the kind.
Without loudly bidding Bartleby depart—as an inferior genius might
have done—lI assumed the ground that depart he must; and upon the
assumption built all I had to say. The more I thought over my proce-
dure, the more I was charmed with it. Nevertheless, next morning,
upon awakening, I had my doubts,—I had somehow slept off the.
fumes of vanity. One of the coolest and wisest hours a man has, is just
after he awakes in the morning. My procedure seemed as sagacious
as ever,—but only in theory. How it would prove in practice—there
was the rub. It was truly a beautiful thought to have assumed
Bartleby’s departure; but, after all, that assumption was simply my
own, and none of Bartleby’s. The great point was, not whether I had
assumed that he would quit me, but: whether he-would prefer so to
do. He was more a man of preferences than assumptions.

After breakfast, I walked down town, arguing the probabilities pro .
and con. One moment I thought it would prove a miserable failure,
and Bartleby would be found all alive at my office as usual; the next
moment it seemed certain that I should see his chair empty. And so.I
kept veering about. At the corner of Broadway and Canal-street, I saw
quite an excited group of people standing in earnest conversation.

“T'll take odds he doesn’t,” said'a voice as I passed.

“Doesn’t go?—done!” said I, “put up your money.” . ss

I was instinctively putting my hand in my pocket to produce my:
‘own, when I remembered that this was an election day. The words.
I had overheard bore no reference to Bartleby, but to the success or

non-success of some candidate for the mayoralty. In my intent. ”

frame of mind, I had, as it were, imagined that all Broadway shared
in my excitement, and were debating the same question with me: I
passed on, very thankful that the uproar of the street screened my
momentary absent-mindedness. :


--- Page 24 ---
24 MELVILLE’s SHORT NOVELS

‘As I-had intended, I was earlier than usual at my office door. I
stood listening for a moment. All was still. He must be gone. I tried
the knob. ‘The door was locked. Yes, my procedure had worked to a
charm; he indeed must be vanished, Yet a certain melancholy mixed
with this: I was almost sorry for my brilliant success. I was fumbling
tinder. the door mat for the key, which Bartleby was to have left
there for me, when accidentally my knee knocked against a panel,
producing a summoning sound, and in response a voice came to me
from within—‘“Not yet; I am occupied.”

It was Bartleby. :

I was thunderstruck. For an instant I stood like: the man who,
pipe. in mouth, was killed one cloudless afternoon long ago in
Virginia, by summer lightning; at his own warm open window he
was killed, and remained leaning out there upon the dreamy after-
noon, till some one touched him, when he fell.

“Not gone!” I murmured at last. But again obeying that wondrous
‘ascendancy which the inscrutable scrivener had over me, and from
which ascendency, for all my chafing, I could not completely escape,
[Lslowly went down stairs and out into the street, and while walking
rotind the block, considered what I should next do in this unheard-of
perplexity. Turn the man out by an actual thrusting I could not; to
drive him away by calling him hard names would not do; calling in the
police was an unpleasant idea; and yet, permit him to enjoy his cadav-
erous triumph over me,—this too I could not think of. What was to be
done?-or, if nothing could be done, was there any thing further that I
could. assume in the matter? Yes, as before I had prospectively:
assumed that Bartleby would depart, so now I might retrospectively -
assume that departed he was. In the legitimate carrying out of this
assumption, I might enter my office in a great hurry, and pretending
not to see Bartleby at all; walk straight against him as if he were air.
Such a proceeding would in a singular degree have the appearance of
ahome:thrust. It was hardly possible that Bartleby could withstand:
such an application of the doctrine of assumptions. But upon second
thoughts the success of the plan seemed rather dubious. I resolved to
argue the matter over with him again. ;

“Bartleby,” said I, entering the office, with a quietly severe expres-
sion, “I am seriously displeased. I am pained, Bartleby. I had thought
better of you. I had imagined you of such a gentlemanly organization,
that in any delicate dilemma a slight hint would suffice—in short, an
assumption. But it appears I am deceived. Why,” I added, unaffect-
edly starting, “you have not even touched that money yet,” pointing to
it, just where I had left it the evening previous. 3

* He:answered nothing.
- Will you, or will you not, quit me?” I now demanded in a sudden
passion, advancing close to him.

oe



--- Page 25 ---
BaRTLEBY, THE SCRIVENER 25

= would prefer not to quit you,” he replied, gently emphasizing
the not.

“What earthly right have you to stay here? Do you pay any rent?
De.you pay my taxes? Or is this property yours?”

..He answered nothing.

. “Are you ready to go on and write now? Are your eyes recovered?
Could you copy a small paper for me this morning? or help examine a
few lines? or step round to the post-office? In a word, will you do any.
thing at all, to give a coloring to-your refusal to depart the premises2”:

He silently retired into his hermitage. :

-:1 was now in such a state of nervous resentment that I thought. it
but prudent to check myself at present from further demonstra-
tions. Bartleby and I were alone. I remembered the tragedy of the
unfortuate Adams and the still more unfortunate Colt’ in the soli-
tary office of the latter; and how poor. Colt, being dreadfully
incensed by Adams, and imprudently permitting himself to get
wildly excited, was at unawares hurried into his fatal act—an act
_ which certainly no man could possibly deplore more than the actor
himself. Often it had occurred to me in my ponderings upon the
subject, that had that altercation taken place in the public street, or
at a private residence, it would not have terminated as it.did. It was
the circumstance of being alone in a solitary office, up stairs, of a
building entirely unhallowed by humanizing domestic associa-
tions—an uncarpeted office, doubtless, of a dusty, haggard sort of
appearance;—this it must have been, which greatly helped to
enhance the irritable desperation of the hapless Colt.

But when this old Adam of resentment rose in me and tempted me
concerning Bartleby, I grappled him and threw him. How? Why,
simply by recalling the divine.injunction: “A new commandment give
I unto you, that ye love one another.”* Yes, this it was that saved me.
Aside from higher considerations, charity often operates as a vastly
wise and prudent principle—a great safeguard to its possessor. Men
have committed murder for jealousy’s sake, and anger’s sake, and
hatred’s sake, and selfishness’ sake, and spiritual pride’s sake; but no
man that ever I heard of, ever committed a diabolical murder for
sweet charity’s sake. Mere self-interest, then, if no better motive can
be enlisted, should, especially. with high-tempered men, prompt all
beings to charity and philanthropy. At any rate, upon the occasion in
question, I strove to drown my exasperated feelings towards the:scriv-

7. A celebrated 1841 murder case in New York City; the crime scene was close to the set-
ting of “Bartleby.” John C. Colt killed Samuel Adams with a hatchet. Convicted of the
murder, Colt stabbed himself to death before he could be hanged. Melville. was aboard
ship in the South Seas when the gruesome details were headlined in the New York news-
papers.

8. Jesus to his disciples (John 13.34).


--- Page 26 ---
26 MELVILLE’s SHORT NOVELS

ener by benevolently construing his conduct. Poor fellow, poor
fellow! thought I, he don’t mean any thing; and besides, he has seen
hard.times, and ought to be indulged.

I endeavored also immediately to occupy myself, and at the same
time to comfort my despondency. I tried to fancy that in the course
of the morning, at such time as might prove agreeable to him,
Bartleby, of his own free accord, would emerge from his hermitage,
and take up some decided line of march in the direction of the door.
But no. Half-past twelve o’clock came; Turkey began to glow in the
face, overturn his inkstand, and become generally obstreperous;
Nippers abated down into quietude and courtesy; Ginger Nut
munched his noon apple; and Bartleby remained standing at his
window in one of his profoundest deadwall reveries. Will it be cred-
ited? Ought I to acknowledge it? That afternoon I left the office
without saying one further word to him.

--Some days now passed, during which, at leisure intervals I looked
a little into “Edwards in the Will,” and “Priestley on Necessity.””
Under the circumstances, those books induced a salutary feeling.
Gradually I slid into the persuasion that these troubles of mine:
touching the scrivener, had been all predestinated from eternity, and
Bartleby was billeted upon me for some mysterious purpose of an all-
wise Providence, which it was not for a mere mortal like me to
fathom. Yes, Bartleby, stay there behind your screen, thought I; I shall
persecute you no more; you are harmless and noiseless. as any of
these old chairs; in short, I never feel so private as when I know you
are here. At least I see it, I feel it; I penetrate to the predestinated pur-
pose’of my life. Iam content. Others may have loftier parts to enact;
but my mission in this world, Bartleby, is to furnish you with office-
room for such period as you may see fit to remain.

A believe that this wise and blessed frame of mind would have con-
tinued with me, had it not been for the unsolicited and uncharitable
remarks obtruded upon me by my professional friends who visited the
rooms. But thus it often is, that the constant friction of illiberal
minds ‘wears out. at last the best resolves of the more generous.
‘Fhough to be sure, when I reflected upon it, it was not strange that
people. entering my office should be struck by the peculiar aspect of
the unaccountable Bartleby, and so be tempted to throw out some
sinister observations concerning him. Sometimes an attorney having:
business with me, and calling at my office, and finding no one but the
serivener there, would undertake to obtain some sort of precise infor-
mation from him touching my whereabouts; but without heeding his

a Joseph. Priestley (1733-1804), English scientist and theologian, author of Doctrine of
Philosophical Necessity (1777). Jonathan Edwards (1703—1758), New England theologian
and philosopher, author of Freedom of Will (1754). Some critics cite Edwards's doctrine
of “Negative Preference” as a source for Bartleby’s “T prefer not to.”



--- Page 27 ---
BarTvLesy, THE SCRIVENER 27

idle talk, Bartleby would remain standing immovable in the middle of
the room. So after contemplating him in that position for a time, the
attorney would depart, no wiser than he came.

_ Also, when a Reference was going on, and the room full of lawyers
and witnesses and business was driving fast; some deeply occupied
legal gentleman present, seeing Bartleby wholly unemployed; would
request him to run round to his (the legal gentleman’s) office and
fetch some papers for him. Thereupon, Bartleby would tranquilly
decline, and remain idle as before. Then the lawyer would give.a great
stare, and turn to me. And what could I say? At last I was made aware
that all through the circle of my professional acquaintance, a whisper
of wonder was running round, having reference to the strange crea-
ture I kept at my office. This worried me very much. And as.the idea
came upon me of his possibly turning out a long-lived man, and keep
occupying my chambers, and denying my authority; and perplexing
my visitors; and scandalizing my professional reputation; and casting
a general gloom over the premises; keeping soul and body together to
the last upon his savings (for doubtless he spent but half.a dime a
day), and in the end perhaps outlive me, and claim possession of my
office by right of his perpetual occupancy: as all these dark anticipa-
tions crowded upon me more and more, and my friends.continually
intruded their relentless remarks upon the apparition in my room;.a
great change was wrought in me. I resolved to gather all my faculties
together, and for ever rid me of this intolerable incubus.

Ere revolving any complicated project, however, adapted to. this
end,.I first simply suggested to Bartleby the propriety of his perma-
nent departure. In a calm and serious tone, I commended the idea to
his careful and mature consideration. But having taken three days to
meditate upon it, he apprised me that his original determination
remained the same; in short, that he still preferred to abide with me.

What shall I do? I now said to myself, buttoning up my coat to
the last button. What shall I do? what ought I to do? what does con-
science say I should do with this man, or rather ghost. Rid myself of
him, I must; go, he shall. But how? You will not thrust him, the poor,
pale, passive mortal,—you will not thrust such a helpless creature
out of your door? you will not dishonor yourself by such cruelty?
No, I will not, I cannot do that. Rather would J let him live and die
here, and then mason up his remains in the wall. What then will
you do?’For all your coaxing, he will not budge. Bribes he leaves
under your own paperweight on your table; in short, it is quite plain
that he prefers to cling to you.

Then something severe, something unusual must be done. What!
surely you will not have him collared by a constable, and commit his
innocent pallor to the common jail? And upon what ground could
you procure such a thing to be done?—a vagrant, is he? What! he a


--- Page 28 ---
28. MELVvILLe’s SHORT NOVELS

vagrant, a wanderer, who refuses to budge? It is because he will not
be a vagrant, then, that you seek to count him as:a vagrant. That is
too absurd. No visible means of support: there I have him. Wrong
again: for indubitably he does support himself, and that is the only
unanswerable proof that any. man can show of his possessing the
means-so to do. No more then. Since he. will not quit me, I must
quit. him. I will change my offices; I will move elsewhere; and give
him fair notice, that if I find him on my new premises I will then
proceed against him as a common trespasser.

Acting accordingly, next day I thus addressed him: “I find these
chambers too far from the City Hall; the air is unwholesome. In a
word, I propose to remove my offices next week, and shall no longer
require your services. I tell you this now, in order that: you may seek
another place.”

~ He made no reply, and nothing more was said.

On-the appointed day I engaged carts and men, proceeded to my
chambers, and having but little furniture, every thing was removed
in a few hours. Throughout, the scrivener remained standing
behind the screen, which I directed to be removed the last thing. It
was withdrawn; and being folded up like a huge folio, left him the
motionless occupant of a naked room. I stood in the entry watching
him a‘moment, while something from within me upbraided me.

I re-entered, with my hand in my pocket—and—and my heart in
my mouth.

“Good-bye, Bartleby; I am going—good-bye, and God some way
bless: you; and take that,” slipping something in his hand. But it
dropped upon the floor, and then,—strange to say——I tore myself:
from him whom I had so longed to be rid of.

Established in my new quarters, for a day or two I kept the door
locked,. and started at every footfall in the passages. When I
returned to my rooms after any little absence, I would pause at the
threshold for an instant, and attentively listen, ere applying. my key.
But these fears were needless. Bartleby never came nigh me. ,

I thought all was going well, when a perturbed looking stranger
visited-me, inquiring whether I was the person who had recently
occupied rooms at No.—Wall-street.

Full of forebodings, I replied that I was.

' “Then sir,” said the stranger, who proved a lawyer, “you are
responsible for the man you left there. He refuses to do any copying;
he refuses to do any thing; he says he prefers not to; and he refuses
to quit the premises.” —

“Iam very sorry, sir,” said I, with assumed tranquillity, but an
inward tremor, “but, really, the man you allude to is nothing to me—

he is no relation or apprentice of mine, that you should hold me
responsible for him.”



--- Page 29 ---
BartLespy, THE SCRIVENER 29

“In mercy’s name, who is he?”

“— certainly cannot inform you. I know nothing about. him.
Formerly I employed him as a copyist; but he has done nothing for
me now for some time past.” >

“J shall settle him then,—-good morning, sir.”

Several days passed, and I heard nothing more; and though I often’
felt a charitable prompting to call at the place and see poor Bartleby,
yet a certain squeamishness of I know not what withheld me. ::

All is over with him, by this time, thought I at last, when through
another week no further intelligence reached me.

But coming to my room the day after, I found several persons
waiting at my door in a high state of nervous excitement.

“That’s the man—-here he comes,” cried the foremost one, whom
I recognized as the lawyer who had previously called upon. me alone.

“You must take him away, sir,.at once,” cried a portly person
among them, advancing upon me, and whom I knew to be the land-
lord of No.—-Wall-street. “These gentlemen, my tenants, cannot
stand it any longer; Mr. B—” pointing to the lawyer, “has turned him
out of his room, and he now persists in haunting the building gen-
erally, sitting upon the banisters of the stairs by day, and sleeping in
the entry by night. Every body is concerned; clients are leaving the
offices; some fears are entertained of a mob; something you must
do, and that without delay.” -

Aghast at this torrent, I fell back before it, and would fain have
locked myself in my new quarters. In vain I persisted that Bartleby was.
nothing to me—no more than to any one else. In vain:—I was the last
person known to have any thing to do with him, and they held me to
the terrible account. Fearful then of being exposed in the papers (as
one person present obscurely threatened) I considered the matter, and
at length said, that if the lawyer would give me a confidential interview:
with the scrivener, in his (the lawyer’s) own room, I would that after-
noon strive my best to rid them of the nuisance they complained of.

Going up stairs to my old haunt, there was Bartleby silently sit-
ting upon the banister at the landing.

“What are you doing here, Bartleby?” said I.

“Sitting upon the banister,” he mildly replied.

I motioned him into the lawyer’s room, who then left us.

“Bartleby,” said I, “are you aware that you are the cause of great
tribulation to me, by persisting in occupying the entry after being
dismissed from the office?”

No answer.

“Now one of two things must take place. Either you must do
something or something must be done to you. Now what sort of
business would you like to engage in? Would you like to re-engage
in copying for some one?” ;


--- Page 30 ---
30 MELVILLE’s SHORT NovELs

“No; | would prefer not to make any change.”

“Would you like a clerkship in a dry-goods store?”

“There is too much confinement about that. No, I would not like
a clerkship; but I am not particular.”

“Tgo much confinement,” I cried, “why you keep yourself con-
fined all the time!”

“I would prefer not to take a clerkship,” he rejoined, as if to settle
that little item at once.

“How would a bar-tender’s business suit you? There is no trying
of the eyesight in that.”

“T would not like it at all; though, as I said before, | am not
particular.” - ;

Elis unwonted wordiness inspirited me. I returned to the charge.

“Well then, would you like to travel through the country col-.
lecting bills for the merchants? That would improve your health.”

“No, I would prefer to be doing something else.”

“How then would going as a companion to Europe, to entertain
some young gentleman with your conversation,—how would that
suit you?”

“Not. at all. It does not strike me that there is any thing definite
about that. I like to be stationary. But I am not particular.”

“Stationary you shall be then,” I cried, now losing all patience,
and for the first time in all my exasperating connection with him
fairly flying into a passion. “If you do not go away from. these
premises before night, I shall feel bound— indeed I am bound—to—
to—to .quit the premises myself!” I rather absurdly concluded,
knowing not with what possible threat to try to frighten his immo-
bility into compliance. Despairing of all further efforts, I was pre-
cipitately leaving him, when‘a final thought occurred to me—one
which had not been wholly unindulged before.

“Bartleby,” said I, in the kindest tone I could assume under such
exciting circumstances, “will you go home with me now-—not to my
office, but my dwelling—and remain there till we can conclude
upon some convenient arrangement for you at our leisure? Come,
let us start now, right away.”

“No: at present I would prefer not to make any change at all.”

I answered nothing; but effectually dodging every one by the sud-
denness and rapidity of my flight, rushed from the building, ran up
Wall-street towards Broadway, and jumping into the first omnibus
was soon removed from pursuit. As soon as tranquillity returned I
distinctly perceived that I had now done all that I possibly could,
both in respect to the demands of the landlord and his tenants, and
with regard to my own desire and sense of duty, to benefit Bartleby,
and shield him from rude persecution. I now strove to be entirely
care-free and quiescent; and my conscience justified me in the



--- Page 31 ---
BarTLesy, THE SCRIVENER 31

attempt; though indeed it was not so successful as I could have
-wished. So fearful was I of being again hunted out by the incensed
landlord and his exasperated tenants, that, surrendering my busi-
ness to Nippers, for a few days I drove about the upper part of the
town and through the suburbs, in my rockaway;' crossed over: to
jersey City and Hoboken, and paid fugitive visits to Manhattanville
‘and Astoria. In fact I almost lived in my rockaway for the time.

When again I entered my office, lo, a note from the landlord lay
upon the desk. I opened it with trembling hands. It informed me
that the writer had sent to the police, and had Bartleby removed to
the Tombs as a vagrant. Moreover, since I knew more about him
than any one else, he wished me to appear at that place, and make
a suitable statement of the facts. These tidings had a conflicting
effect upon me. At first I was indignant; but at last almost appreved.
The landlord’s energetic, summary disposition, had led him to adopt
a procedure which I do not think I would have decided upon myself;
and yet as a last resort, under such peculiar circumstances, it
seemed the only plan.

As I afterwards learned, the poor scrivener, when told that he
must be conducted to the Tombs, offered not the slightest obstacle,
but in his pale unmoving way, silently acquiesced.

Some of the compassionate and curious bystanders joined the
party; and headed by one of the constables’ arm: in arm -with
Bartleby, the silent procession filed its way through all the noise,
and heat, and joy of the roaring thoroughfares at noon.

The same day I received the note I went to the Tombs, or to speak
more properly, the Halls of Justice. Seeking the right officer, I stated
the purpose of my call, and was informed that the individual. 1
described was indeed within. I then assured the functionary that
Bartleby was a perfectly honest man, and greatly to be compassion-
ated, however ‘unaccountably eccentric. I narrated all I knew, and
closed by suggesting the idea of letting him remain in as indulgent
confinement as possible till something less harsh might be done—
though indeed I hardly knew what. At all events, if nothing else
could be decided upon, the alms-house must receive him. I then
begged to have an interview.

Being under no disgraceful charge, and quite serene and harm-
less in all his ways, they had permitted him freely to wander about
the prison, and especially in the inclosed grass-platted yards
thereof. And so I found him there, standing all alone in the quietest
of the yards, his face towards a high wall, while all around, from the
narrow slits of the jail windows, I thought I saw peering out upon
him the eyes of murderers and thieves.

1. An open carriage.


--- Page 32 ---
32 MELVILLE’s SHORT NOVELS

“Bartleby!” :

“I. know you,” he said, without looking round,—“and I want
nothing to say to you.”

“It was not I that brought you here, Bartleby,” said I, keenly
pained at his implied suspicion. “And to you, this should not be so
-vile a-place. Nothing reproachful attaches to you by being here. And
see, itis not so sad a place as one might think. Look, there is the
-sky,.and here is the grass.

“I know. where I am,” he replied, but would say nothing more, and
-so Lleft-him.

As I entered the corridor again, a broad meat-like man, in an
apron, accosted me, and jerking his thumb over his shoulder said—
"Is.that your friend?”

“Ves. ”

“Does he want to starve? If he does, let him live on the prison
fare, that’s all.”

.. “Who are you?” asked I, not knowing what to make of such an
unofficially speaking person in such a place.

» “Tam the grub-man. Such gentlemen as have. friends here, hire
mete provide them with something good to eat.’

3 “Is this so?” said I, turning to the turnkey.

*.He'said it was.

“Well then,” said I, slipping some silver into the grubman’ s hands
(for so they called him). “I want you to give particular attention to
my friend there; let him have the best dinner you can get. And you

_anust be as polite to him as possible.”

so'Imtroduce me,. will you?” said the grub-man, looking at me with
~ expression which seemed to say he was. all impatience for an
opportunity to give a specimen of his breeding.

»/Thinking it-would prove of benefit to the scrivener, I acquiesced;
‘and. asking the grub-man his name, went up with him.to Bartleby.

‘Bartleby, this is a friend; you will find him very useful to you.”

-~&Your sarvant, sir, your sarvant,” said the grub-man, making a low
-salutation behind his apron. “Hope you find it pleasant here, sir;—
‘spacious grounds—cool apartments, sir—hope you'll stay with us
some time—try to make it agreeable. What will you have for dinner
today?” ‘
c“il-prefer not to dine to-day,” said Bartleby, turning away. “It would ©
disagree with me; I am unused to dinners.” So saying he slowly
moved to the other side of the inclosure, and took up a position ©
fronting the dead-wall. :

“How’s: this?” said the grub-man, addressing me with a stare of ©

astonishment. “He’s odd, aint he>”

“I think he is a little deranged,” said I, sadly.

“Deranged? deranged is it? Well now, upon my word, I thought that



--- Page 33 ---
BarTLeBY, THE SCRIVENER 33

friend of yourn was a gentleman forger; they are always pale and gen-
teel-like, them forgers. I can’t help pity ’em—can’t help it, sir. Did you
know Monroe Edwards?” he added touchingly, and paused. ‘Then,
laying his hand pityingly on my shoulder, sighed, “he died of con-

“sumption at Sing-Sing. So you weren’t acquainted with Monroe?”

- “No, J was never socially acquainted with any forgers. But I
cannot stop longer. Look to my friend yonder. You will not lose by it.
I will see you again.”

Some few days after this, I again obtained admission to: the
Tombs, and went through the corridors in quest of Bartleby; but
without finding him.

“I saw him coming from his cell not long ago,” said a turnkey,
“may be he’s gone to loiter in the yards.”

So I went in that direction.

“Are you looking for the silent man?” said another turnkey
passing me. “Yonder he lies—sleeping in the yard there. "Tis not
twenty minutes since I saw him lie down.” :

The yard was entirely quiet. It.was not accessible to the common
prisoners. The surrounding walls, of amazing thickness, kept off:all
sound behind them. The Egyptian character of the masonry
weighed upon me with its gloom. But a soft imprisoned turf. grew
under foot. The heart of the eternal pyramids, it seemed, wherein,
by some strange magic, through the clefts, grass-seed, dropped by
birds, had sprung.®

Strangely huddled at the base of the wall, his knees drawn up,
and lying on his side, his head touching the ‘cold stones, I saw the
wasted Bartleby. But nothing stirred. I paused; then went close up
to him; stooped over, and saw that his dim eyes were open; other-
wise he seemed profoundly sleeping. Something prompted me to
touch him. I felt his hand, when a tingling shiver ran up my arm and
down my spine to my feet.

The round face of the grub-man peered upon me now. “His dinner
is ready. Won’t he dine to-day, either? Or does he live without dining?”

“Lives without dining,” said I, and closed the eyes.

“Eh!—He’s asleep, aint he?”

“With kings and counsellors,” murmured I.

a a a a a 2

There would seem little need for proceeding further in this history.
Imagination will readily supply the meagre recital of poor Bartleby’s

2. A notorious swindler, imprisoned in the Tombs. He was characterized by Horace Greeley
“the most distinguished financier since the days of Judas Iscariot.”

3. ‘Compare this description of the prison yard with Melville's letter to Nathaniel
Hawthorne, June 1851, “I am like one of those seeds taken out of the Egyptian Pyramids,
which, after being three thousand years a seed and nothing but a seed, being planted in
English soil, it developed itself, grew to greenness, and then fell to mould. So I.”


--- Page 34 ---
34 MELVILLE’s SHORT NOVEES

interment. But ere parting with the reader, let-me say, that if this little
narrative has. sufficiently interested him, to awaken. curiosity as to
_who Bartleby was, and what manner of life he led prior to the present
“ narrator’s: making his acquaintance, I can) only reply, that in. such
curiosity I fully share, but am wholly unable to gratify it. Yet here I
hardly know whether I should divulge one little:item of rumor, which
came::to my ear a féw months after the scrivener’s. decease.’ Upon
what basis it rested, I could never ascertain; and hence how true it is
I-cannot now tell. But inasmuch as this vague report-has not :-been
without a:certain strange suggestive interest to me, however sad, it
may prove the same with some others; and so I will briefly mention it.
The report was this: that Bartleby had been a subordinate clerk in the
Dead Letter Office at Washington, from which he had been suddenly
_ removed by a change in the administration. When I think over this
rumor, I cannot adequately express the emotions. which seize me.
- Dead letters! does it not sound like dead men? ‘Conceive a.man by
nature and misfortune prone to a‘pallid hopelessness, can-any busi-
-ness seem more fitted to heighten it than that of continually handling
these dead letters.and assorting them for the flames? For by the cart-
load they are annually burned. Sometimes from out the folded paper
the pale clerk takes a ring:—the finger it was meant for, perhaps,
moulders in the grave; a bank-note sent in. swiftest charity:—he
whom it would relieve, nor eats nor hungers.any more; pardon for
those who died despairing; hope for those who died unhoping; good
tidings for those who died stifled by unrelieved calamities..On
errands of life, these letters speed to death.
Ah. Bartleby! Ah humanity!

Benito Cereno'

In the year 1799, Captain Amasa_ Delano, . of Duxbury, in |
Massachusetts, commanding a large sealer and general trader, lay at
anchor, with a valuable cargo, in the harbor of St. Maria—a small,

1. ‘The text is from the story’s first printing in Putnam’s Monthly (October, November, and
December .1855).and includes Melville’s revisions for its inclusion in The Piazza Tales
(1856). An important source for the story is Chapter 18 of Amasa Delano’s Narrative of
Voyages and Travels, in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres (Boston, 1817), reprinted
here on pp. 199-228. There is a substantial body of criticism devoted to the many
changes Melville made in Delano’s chapter. Among them: changing the date from 1805 |
to 1799, changing the names of the ships from the Perseverence and the Tryal to the
Bachelor's Delight and the San Dominick. Modern readers see an allusion to the island of
Santo Domingo, where Toussaint L’Overture led a slave rebellion in the 1790s, San
Dominick may also refer to Dominican monks, the “Black Friars” prominent in the
Spanish Inquisition. Delano’s eighteenth chapter is fourteen thousand words; Benito
Cereno is thirty-four thousand words,



