--- Page 1 ---
MILAN KUNDERA

The Art of the Novel

Translated from the French by Linda Asher

Copyright © 1986 by Milan Kundera

English translation copyright © 1988 by Grove Press, Inc.
First published in French as L'Art du roman by

Editions Gallimard, 1986

PART ONE
The Depreciated Legacy of Cervantes
1.

In 1935, three years before his death, Edmund Husserl gave his celebrated lectures in
Vienna and Prague on the crisis of European humanity. For Husserl, the adjective


--- Page 2 ---
"European" meant the spiritual identity that extends beyond geographical Europe (to
America, for instance) and that was born with ancient Greek philosophy. In his view, this
philosophy, for the first time in History, apprehended the world (the world as a whole) as
a question to be answered. It interrogated the world not in order to satisfy this or that
practical need but because "the passion to know had seized mankind."

The crisis Husserl spoke of seemed to him so profound that he wondered whether Europe
was still able to survive it. The roots of the crisis lay for him at the beginning of the
Modern Era, in Galileo and Descartes, in the one-sided nature of the European sciences,
which reduced the world to a mere object of technical and mathematical investigation and
put the concrete world of life, die Lebenswelt as he called it, beyond their horizon.

The rise of the sciences propelled man into the tunnels of the specialized disciplines. The
more he advanced in knowledge, the less clearly could he see either the world as a whole
or his own self, and he plunged further into what Husserl's pupil Heidegger

called, in a beautiful and almost magical phrase, "the forgetting of being."

Once elevated by Descartes to "master and proprietor of nature," man has now become a
mere thing to the forces (of technology, of politics, of history) that bypass him, surpass
him, possess him. To those forces, man's concrete being, his "world of life" (die
Lebenswelt), has neither value nor interest: it is eclipsed, forgotten from the start.

2.

Yet I think it would be naive to take the severity of this view of the Modern Era as a mere
condemnation. I would say rather that the two great philosophers laid bare the ambiguity
of this epoch, which is decline and progress at the same time and which, like all that is
human, carries the seed of its end in its beginning. To my mind, this ambiguity does not
diminish the last four centuries of European culture, to which I feel all the more attached
as I am not a philosopher but a novelist. Indeed, for me, the founder of the Modern Era is
not only Descartes but also Cervantes.

Perhaps it is Cervantes whom the two phenome-nologists neglected to take into
consideration in their judgment of the Modern Era. By that I mean: If it is true that
philosophy and science have forgotten about man's being, it emerges all the more plainly
that with Cervantes a great European art took shape that is

nothing other than the investigation of this forgotten being.

Indeed, all the great existential themes Heidegger analyzes in Being and Time—
considering them to have been neglected by all earlier European philosophy— had been
unveiled, displayed, illuminated by four centuries of the novel (four centuries of
European reincarnation of the novel). In its own way, through its own logic, the novel
discovered the various dimensions of existence one by one: with Cervantes and his
contemporaries, it inquires into the nature of adventure; with Richardson, it begins to


--- Page 3 ---
examine "what happens inside," to unmask the secret life of the feelings; with Balzac, it
discovers man's rootedness in history; with Flaubert, it explores the terra previously
incognita of the everyday; with Tolstoy, it focuses on the intrusion of the irrational in
human behavior and decisions. It probes time: the elusive past with Proust, the elusive
present with Joyce. With Thomas Mann, it examines the role of the myths from the
remote past that control our present actions. Et cetera, et cetera.

The novel has accompanied man uninterruptedly and faithfully since the beginning of the
Modern Era. It was then that the "passion to know," which Husserl considered the
essence of European spirituality, seized the novel and led it to scrutinize man's concrete
life and protect it against "the forgetting of being"; to hold "the world of life" under a
permanent light. That is the sense in which I understand and share Hermann Broch's
insistence in repeating: The sole raison d'etre of a novel is to discover what only the
novel can discover. A novel that does not discover a hitherto

unknown segment of existence is immoral. Knowledge is the novel's only morality.

I would also add: The novel is Europe's creation; its discoveries, though made in various
languages, belong to the whole of Europe. The sequence of discoveries (not the sum of
what was written) is what constitutes the history of the European novel. It is only in such
a supranational context that the value of a work (that is to say, the import of its discovery)
can be fully seen and understood.

3.

As God slowly departed from the seat whence he had directed the universe and its order
of values, distinguished good from evil, and endowed each thing with meaning, Don
Quixote set forth from his house into a world he could no longer recognize. In the
absence of the Supreme Judge, the world suddenly appeared in its fearsome ambiguity;
the single divine Truth decomposed into myriad relative truths parceled out by men. Thus
was born the world of the Modern Era, and with it the novel, the image and model of that
world.

To take, with Descartes, the thinking self as the basis of everything, and thus to face the
universe alone, is to adopt an attitude that Hegel was right to call heroic.

To take, with Cervantes, the world as ambiguity, to be obliged to face not a single
absolute truth but a welter of contradictory truths (truths embodied in imaginary selves
called characters), to have as one's

only certainty the wisdom of uncertainty, requires no less courage.

What does Cervantes' great novel mean? Much has been written on the question. Some
see in it a rationalist critique of Don Quixote's hazy idealism. Others see it as a
celebration of that same idealism. Both interpretations are mistaken because they both
seek at the novel's core not an inquiry but a moral position.


--- Page 4 ---
Man desires a world where good and evil can be clearly distinguished, for he has an
innate and irrepressible desire to judge before he understands. Religions and ideologies
are founded on this desire. They can cope with the novel only by translating its language
of relativity and ambiguity into their own apo-dictic and dogmatic discourse. They
require that someone be right: either Anna Karenina is the victim of a narrow-minded
tyrant, or Karenin is the victim of an immoral woman; either K. is an innocent man
crushed by an unjust Court, or the Court represents divine justice and K. is guilty.

This "either-or" encapsulates an inability to tolerate the essential relativity of things
human, an inability to look squarely at the absence of the Supreme Judge. This inability
makes the novel's wisdom (the wisdom of uncertainty) hard to accept and understand.

4.

Don Quixote set off into a world that opened wide before him. He could go out freely and
come home as he pleased. The early European novels are journeys

through an apparently unlimited world. The opening of Jacques le Fataliste comes upon
the two heroes in mid-journey; we don't know where they've come from or where they're
going. They exist in a time without beginning or end, in a space without frontiers, in the

midst of a Europe whose future will never end.

Half a century after Diderot, in Balzac, the distant horizon has disappeared like a
landscape behind those modern structures, the social institutions: the police, the law, the
world of money and crime, the army, the State. In Balzac's world, time no longer idles
happily by as it does for Cervantes and Diderot. It has set forth on the train called
History. The train is easy to board, hard to leave. But it isn't at all fearsome yet, it even
has its appeal; it promises adventure to every passenger, and with it fame and fortune.

Later still, for Emma Bovary, the horizon shrinks to the point of seeming a barrier.
Adventure lies beyond it, and the longing becomes intolerable. Within the monotony of
the quotidian, dreams and daydreams take on importance. The lost infinity of the outside
world is replaced by the infinity of the soul. The great illusion of the irreplaceable
uniqueness of the individual—one of Europe's finest illusions—blossoms forth.

But the dream of the soul's infinity loses its magic when History (or what remains of it:
the suprahuman force of an omnipotent society) takes hold of man. History no longer
promises him fame and fortune; it barely promises him a land-surveyor's job. In the face
of the Court or the Castle, what can K. do? Not much. Can't he at least dream as Emma
Bovary used to do?

No, the situation's trap is too terrible, and like a vacuum cleaner it sucks up all his
thoughts and feelings: all he can think of is his trial, his surveying job. The infinity of the

soul—if it ever existed—has become a nearly useless appendage.

5.


--- Page 5 ---
The path of the novel emerges as a parallel history of the Modern Era. As I look back
over it, it seems strangely short and limited. Isn't that Don Quixote himself, after a three-
hundred-year journey, returning to the village disguised as a land-surveyor? Once he had
set out to seek adventures of his own choosing, but now in the village below the Castle he
has no choice, the adventure is imposed on him: a petty squabble with the administration
over a mistake in his file. So what, after three centuries, has happened to adventure, the
first great theme of the novel? Has it become its own parody? What does that mean? That
the path of the novel winds up in a paradox?

Yes, so it would seem. And that is by no means the only paradox. The Good Soldier
Schweik is perhaps the last great popular novel. Isn't it astonishing that this comic novel
is also a war novel, whose action unfolds in the army and at the front? What has
happened to war and its horrors if they've become laughing matters?

In Homer and in Tolstoy, war had a perfectly comprehensible meaning: people fought for
Helen or for

Russia. Schweik and his companions go to the front without knowing why and, what is
even more shocking, without caring to know.

What, then, is the motor of war if not Helen or country? Sheer force that wills to assert
itself as force? The "will to will" that Heidegger later wrote about? Yet hasn't that been
behind all wars since the beginning of time? Yes, of course. But this time, in Hasek, it is
stripped of any rational argument. No one believes in the drivel of the propaganda, not
even those who manufacture it. Force is naked here, as naked as in Kafka's novels.
Indeed, the Court has nothing to gain from executing K., nor has the Castle from
tormenting the Land-Surveyor. Why did Germany, why does Russia today want to
dominate the world? To be richer? Happier? Not at all. The aggressivity of force is
thoroughly disinterested; unmotivated; it wills only its own will; it is pure irrationality.

Kafka and Hasek thus bring us face to face with this enormous paradox: In the course of
the Modern Era, Cartesian rationality has corroded, one after the other, all the values
inherited from the Middle Ages. But just when reason wins a total victory, pure
irrationality (force willing only its will) seizes the world stage, because there is no longer
any generally accepted value system to block its path.

This paradox, masterfully illuminated in Hermann Broch's The Sleepwalkers, is one of
those I like to call terminal. There are others. For example: The Modern Era has nurtured
a dream in which mankind, divided into its separate civilizations, would someday come
together in unity and everlasting peace. Today, the

history of the planet has finally become one indivisible whole, but it is war, ambulant and
everlasting war, that embodies and guarantees this long-desired unity of mankind. Unity

of mankind means: No escape for anyone anywhere.

6.


--- Page 6 ---
Husserl's lectures on the European crisis and on the possible disappearance of European
mankind were his philosophical testament. He gave those lectures in two capitals of
Central Europe. This coincidence has a deep meaning: for it was in that selfsame Central
Europe that, for the first time in its modern history, the West could see the death of the
West, or, more exactly, the amputation ofa part of itself; when Warsaw, Budapest, and
Prague were swallowed up by the Russian empire. This calamity was engendered by the
First World War, which, unleashed by the Hapsburg empire, led to the end of that empire
and unbalanced forever an enfeebled Europe.

The time was past when man had only the monster of his own soul to grapple with, the
peaceful time of Joyce and Proust. In the novels of Kafka, Hasek, Musil, Broch, the
monster comes from outside and is called History; it no longer has anything to do with
the train the adventurers used to ride; it is impersonal, uncontrollable, incalculable,
incomprehensible—and it is inescapable. This was the moment (just after the First World
War) when the pleiad of great Central

European novelists saw, felt, grasped the terminal paradoxes of the Modern Era.

But it would be wrong to read their novels as social and political prophecies, as if they
were anticipations of Orwell! What Orwell tells us could have been said just as well (or
even much better) in an essay or pamphlet. On the contrary, these novelists discover
"what only the novel can discover": they demonstrate how, under the conditions of the
"terminal paradoxes," all existential categories suddenly change their meaning: What is
adventure if a K.'s freedom of action is completely illusory? What is future if the
intellectuals of The Man Without Qualities have not the slightest inkling of the war that
will sweep their lives away the next day? What is crime if Broch's Huguenau not only
does not regret but actually forgets the murder he has committed? And if the only great
comic novel of the period, Hasek's Schweik, uses war as its setting, then what has
happened to the comic? Where is the difference between public and private if K., even in
bed with a woman, is never without the two emissaries of the Castle? And in that case,
what is solitude? A burden, a misery, a curse, as some would have us believe, or on the
contrary, a supremely precious value in the process of being crushed by the ubiquitous
collectivity?

The periods of the novel's history are very long (they have nothing to do with the hectic
shifts of fashion) and are characterized by the particular aspect of being on which the
novel concentrates. Thus the potential of Flaubert's discovery of the quotidian was only
fully developed seventy years later, in James Joyce's gigantic

work. The period inaugurated seventy years ago by the pleiad of Central European
novelists (the period of terminal paradoxes) seems to me far from finished.

7.

The death of the novel has been much discussed for a long time: notably by the Futurists,
by the Surrealists, by nearly all the avant-gardes. They saw the novel dropping off the


--- Page 7 ---
road of progress, yielding to a radically new future and an art bearing no resemblance to
what had existed before. The novel was to be buried in the name of historical justice, like
poverty, the ruling classes, obsolete cars, or top hats.

But if Cervantes is the founder of the Modern Era, then the end of his legacy ought to
signify more than a mere stage in the history of literary forms; it would herald the end of
the Modern Era. That is why the blissful smile that accompanies those obituaries of the
novel strikes me as frivolous. Frivolous because I have already seen and lived through the
death of the novel, a violent death (inflicted by bans, censorship, and ideological
pressure), in the world where I spent much of my life and which is usually called
totalitarian. At that time it became utterly clear that the novel was mortal; as mortal as the
West of the Modern Era. As a model of this Western world, grounded in the relativity and
ambiguity of things human, the

novel is incompatible with the totalitarian universe. This incompatibility is deeper than
the one that separates a dissident from an apparatchik, or a human-rights campaigner
from a torturer, because it is not only political or moral but ontological. By which I mean:
The world of one single Truth and the relative, ambiguous world of the novel are molded
of entirely different substances. Totalitarian Truth excludes relativity, doubt, questioning;
it can never accommodate what I would call the spirit of the novel.

But aren't there hundreds and thousands of novels published in huge editions and widely
read in Communist Russia? Certainly; but these novels add nothing to the conquest of
being. They discover no new segment of existence; they only confirm what has already
been said; furthermore: in confirming what everyone says (what everyone must say), they
fulfill their purpose, their glory, their usefulness to that society. By discovering nothing,
they fail to participate in the sequence of discoveries that for me constitutes the history of
the novel; they place themselves outside that history, or, if you like: they are novels that
come after the history of the novel.

About half a century ago the history of the novel came to a halt in the empire of Russian
Communism. That is an event of huge importance, given the greatness of the Russian
novel from Gogol to Bely. Thus the death of the novel is not just a fanciful idea. It has
already happened. And we now know how the novel dies: it's not that it disappears; it
falls away from its history. Its death occurs quietly, unnoticed, and no one is outraged.

8.

But hasn't the novel come to the end of the road by its own internal logic? Hasn't it
already mined all its possibilities, all its knowledge, and all its forms? I've heard the
history of the novel compared to a seam of coal long since exhausted. But isn't it more
like a cemetery of missed opportunities, of unheard appeals? There are four appeals to
which I am especially responsive.

The appeal of play: Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy and Denis Diderot's Jacques le
Fataliste are for me the two greatest novelistic works of the eighteenth century, two


--- Page 8 ---
novels conceived as grand games. They reach heights of playfulness, of lightness, never
scaled before or since. Afterward, the novel got itself tied to the imperative of
verisimilitude, to realistic settings, to chronological order. It abandoned the possibilities
opened up by these two masterpieces, which could have led to a different development of
the novel (yes, it's possible to imagine a whole other history of the European novel. . .).

The appeal of dream: The slumbering imagination of the nineteenth century was abruptly
awakened by Franz Kafka, who achieved what the Surrealists later called for but never
themselves really accomplished: the fusion of dream and reality. This was in fact a
longstanding aesthetic ambition of the novel, already intimated by Novalis, but its
fulfillment required a special alchemy that Kafka alone discovered a century later.

His enormous contribution is less the final step in a historical development than an
unexpected opening that shows that the novel is a place where the imagination can
explode as in a dream, and that the novel can break free of the seemingly inescapable
imperative of verisimilitude.

The appeal of thought: Musil and Broch brought a sovereign and radiant intelligence to
bear on the novel. Not to transform the novel into philosophy, but to marshal around the
story all the means—rational and irrational, narrative and contemplative—that could
illuminate man's being; could make of the novel the supreme intellectual synthesis. Is
their achievement the completion of the novel's history, or is it instead the invitation to a
long journey?

The appeal of time: The period of terminal paradoxes incites the novelist to broaden the
time issue beyond the Proustian problem of personal memory to the enigma of collective
time, the time of Europe, Europe looking back on its own past, weighing up its history
like an old man seeing his whole life in a single moment. Whence the desire to overstep
the temporal limits of an individual life, to which the novel had hitherto been confined,
and to insert in its space several historical periods (Aragon and Fuentes have already tried
this).

But I don't want to predict the future paths of the novel, which I cannot know; all I mean
to say is this: If the novel should really disappear, it will do so not because it has
exhausted its powers but because it exists in a world grown alien to it.

9.

The unification of the planet's history, that humanist dream which God has spitefully
allowed to come true, has been accompanied by a process of dizzying reduction. True,
the termites of reduction have always gnawed away at life: even the greatest love ends up
as a skeleton of feeble memories. But the character of modern society hideously
exacerbates this curse: it reduces man's life to its social function; the history of a people
to a small set of events that are themselves reduced to a tendentious interpretation; social
life is reduced to political struggle, and that in turn to the confrontation of just two great


--- Page 9 ---
global powers. Man is caught in a veritable whirlpool of reduction where Hus-serl's
"world of life" is fatally obscured and being is forgotten.

Now, if the novel's raison d'etre is to keep "the world of life" under a permanent light and
to protect us from "the forgetting of being," is it not more than ever necessary today that
the novel should exist?

Yes, so it seems to me. But alas, the novel too is ravaged by the termites of reduction,
which reduce not only the meaning of the world but also the meaning of works of art.
Like all of culture, the novel is more and more in the hands of the mass media; as agents
of the unification of the planet's history, the media amplify and channel the reduction
process; they distribute throughout the world the same sim-

plifications and stereotypes easily acceptable by the greatest number, by everyone, by all
mankind. And it doesn't much matter that different political interests appear in the
various organs of the media. Behind these surface differences reigns a common spirit.
You have only to glance at American or European political weeklies, of the left or the
right: they all have the same view of life, reflected in the same ordering of the table of
contents, under the same headings, in the same journalistic phrasing, the same
vocabulary, and the same style, in the same artistic tastes, and in the same ranking of
things they deem important or insignificant. This common spirit of the mass media,
camouflaged by political diversity, is the spirit of our time. And this spirit seems to me
contrary to the spirit of the novel.

The novel's spirit is the spirit of complexity. Every novel says to the reader: "Things are
not as simple as you think." That is the novel's eternal truth, but it grows steadily harder
to hear amid the din of easy, quick answers that come faster than the question and block it
off. In the spirit of our time, it's either Anna or Karenin who is right, and the ancient
wisdom of Cervantes, telling us about the difficulty of knowing and the elusiveness of
truth, seems cumbersome and useless.

The novel's spirit is the spirit of continuity: each work is an answer to preceding ones,
each work contains all the previous experience of the novel. But the spirit of our time is
firmly focused on a present that is so expansive and profuse that it shoves the past off our
horizon and reduces time to the present moment only.

Within this system the novel is no longer a work (a thing made to last, to connect the past
with the future) but one current event among many, a gesture with no tomorrow.

10.

Does this mean that, "in a world grown alien to it," the novel will disappear? That it will
leave Europe to founder in "the forgetting of being"? That nothing will be left but the
endless babble of graphomaniacs, nothing but novels that come after the history of the
novel? I don't know. I merely believe I know that the novel cannot live in peace with the


--- Page 10 ---
spirit of our time: if it is to go on discovering the undiscovered, to go on "progressing" as
novel, it can do so only against the progress of the world.

The avant-garde saw things differently; it was possessed by an ambition to be in harmony
with the future. It is true, avant-garde artists did create works that were courageous,
difficult, provocative, ridiculed, but they did so in the conviction that "the spirit of the
time" was with them and would soon prove them right.

Once upon a time I too thought that the future was the only competent judge of our works
and actions. Later on I understood that chasing after the future is the worst conformism of
all, a craven flattery of the mighty. For the future is always mightier than the

present. It will pass judgment on us, of course. And without any competence.

But if the future is not a value for me, then to what am I attached? To God? Country? The
people? The individual?

My answer is as ridiculous as it is sincere: I am attached to nothing but the depreciated
legacy of Cervantes.


