--- Page 1 ---
OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS

For over roo years Oxford World’s Classes have brought ©
readers closer to the world’s great literature, Now with over 700
titles—from the 4,000-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the
twentieth century's greatest novels—the series makes available

lesser-known as well as celebrated writing. -

The pocket-sized hardbacks of the early years contained -°
introductions by Virginia Woolf, T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene,
and other literary figures which enriched the experience of reading.
Today the series is recognized for its fine scholarship and
‘reliability in texts that span world literature, drama and poetry,
religion, philosophy and politics. Each edition includes perceptive
commentary and essential background information to meet the
changing needs of readers.

OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE

Thus Spoke Zarathustra

A Book for Everyone
and Nobody

Translated with an Introduction and Notes by
GRAHAM PARKES ,

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS



--- Page 2 ---
ZARATHUSTRA’S PROLOGUE

I
When Zarathustra was thirty years old, he abandoned his home and
the lake of his home and went into the mountains] Here he enjoyed
his spirit and his solitude and for ten years did not tire of them.* At
last, however, there was a change in his heart—and so one morning
with the dawn of morning he rose, stepped out before the sun, and
spoke to it thus:

‘Greetings, Great Star! What would your happiness be, were it not
for those whom you illumine!*

‘For ten years you have come up here to my cave: you would have
grown weary of your light and of this course without me, my eagle,
and my serpent. :

‘But we were waiting for you every morning, took from you your
overflow and also blessed you for it. .

‘Behold! I am overburdened with my wisdom: like the bee that has
gathered too much honey, I need hands outstretched to receive it.*

‘T should like to bestow-and distribute, until the wise among
human beings once again become glad of their folly and the poor
once again of their riches.

‘For that I must descend into the depths: just as you do in the
evening when you go down behind the sea and still bring light to the
underworld, you overrich star!*

‘T must, like you, go wnder, as human beings call it, to whom I
would go down.

‘So bless me then, you tranquil eye, who can look without envy
even upon all-too-great happiness!

‘Bless the cup that wants to overflow, that the water may flow from
it golden and carry everywhere the reflection of your delight!

“Behold! This cup wants to become empty again, and Zarathustra «
wants to become human again.”*

—Thus began Zarathustra’s going-under.

*



--- Page 3 ---
Io. Thus Spoke Zarathustra

2

Zarathustra climbed. down the mountain alone and no one —

encountered him. But when he came into the forest, there suddenly
stood before him an old man who had left his holy hut in order to
search in the forest for roots. And thus spoke the old man to
Zarathustra:

‘No stranger to me is this wanderer: many years ago he passed by
here before. Zarathustra he was called; but now he has transformed
himself. :

‘Then you were carrying your ashes to the mountains: would you
today carry your fire into the valleys? Do you not fear the arsonist’s
punishment?

‘Yes, I recognize Zarathustra. Clear is his eye, and around his
mouth no trace of disgust. Does he not walk like a dancer?

‘Zarathustra is transformed, Zarathustra has become a child,
Zarathustra is an awakened one: what do you want now among
sleepers?*

‘You lived in your solitude as if in the sea, and the sea bore you up. .

Alas, you want to climb onto land? Alas, you want to drag your body
yourself again?”

Zarathustra answered: ‘I love human beings.’

‘But why’, said the holy man, ‘did I go into the forest and the
desert? Was it not because I loved human beings all too much?

‘Now I love God: human beings I love not. The human being is"

for me too incomplete an affair. Love of human beings would be the
death of me.’

Zarathustra answered: “What did I say of love! I bring human
beings a present.’

‘Give them nothing,’ said the holy man. ‘Rather take ‘something

from them and carry it for them: that will do them the greatest —

good—as long as it does you good!

‘And if you would give to them, then give them nothing more than

alms, and let them beg even for that!’

‘No,’ answered Zarathustra, ‘I give no alms. For that J am not poor
enough.’

The holy man laughed at Zarathustra and spoke to him: thus:
‘Then see to it that they accept your treasures! They are suspicious
of solitaries, and do not believe that we come in order to bestow.

First Part II

‘Too lonely for them is the sound of our footsteps in the lanes. And
when, in their beds at night they hear a man going by long before the
sun has risen, they surely ask themselves: Where is that thief going?

‘Do not go to human beings but stay in the forest! Go rather even

. to the beasts! Why would you not be, like me—a bear among the

bears, a bird among the birds?’
‘And what does the holy man do in the forest?’ asked Zarathustra.
The holy man answered: ‘I make up songs and sing them, and as I

' make up songs, I laugh and weep and growl: thus do I praise God.

‘With singing, weeping, laughing, and growling I praise the God
who is my God. But what do you bring us as a present?”

When Zarathustra heard these words he saluted the holy man and
said: ‘What could I have to give to you! But let me go quickly, that I
might take nothing from you!’—And thus they parted fromi each
other, the old man and the younger, faughing, just like two boys
laughing.

But when Zarathustra was alone again, he spoke thus to his heart:*
‘Could this be possible! This old holy man in his forest has heard
nothing of this yet, that God is dead!’ —

of .
co x,

3

When Zarathustra came to the nearest town, which lay on the edge
of the forest, he found there a crowd of people gathered in the
market-square, for it had been announced that a rope-dancer* would
be appearing. And Zarathustra spoke to the people thus:

‘I teach to you the Overhuman. The human is something that shall
be overcome. What have you done to overcome it?

” ‘All beings so far have created something beyond themselves: and
you want to be the ebb of this great tide, and even go back to the
beasts rather than overcome the human?

“What is the ape for the human being? A laughing-stock or a
painful cause for shame. And the human shall be just that for the
Overhuman: a laughing-stock or a painful cause for shame.

‘You have made your way from worm to human, and much in you
is still. worm. Once you were apes, and even now the human being is
still more of an ape than any ape is,*



--- Page 4 ---
12 Thus Spoke Zarathustra

‘Whoever is the wisest among you is still no more than a discord

and hybrid between plant and spectre. But do I bid you become

spectres or plants?
‘Behold, I teach to you the Overhuman!

‘The Qverhuman is the sense of the earth. May your will say: Let ;

the Overhuman be the sense of the earth!
~
‘I beseech you, my brothers, stay true to the earth and do not
believe. those who talk of oyer-earthly hopes! They are poison-
mixers, whether they know it or not. .

‘They are despisers of life, moribund and poisoned themselves, of .

whom the earth is weary: so let them pass on!

‘Once sacrilege against God was the greatest sacrilege, but God
died, and thereby the sacrilegious died too. Sacrilege against the
earth is now the most terrible thing, and to revere the entrails of the
unfathomable more than a sense of the earth!

. ‘Once the soul looked despisingly upon the body, and at that time -

this despising was the highest thing: she wanted the body to be lean,
ghastly, and starved. Thus she thought to slip away from the body
and the earth.

‘Oh this soul was herself still lean, ghastly, and starved: and
cruelty was the lust of this soul!

‘But you too, my brothers, tell me: what does your body proclaim
about your soul? Is your soul not péverty and filth and wretched
contentment? :

‘Verily, a polluted stream is the human. One must‘be a veritable
sea to absorb such a polluted stream without becoming unclean.

‘Behold, I teach to you the Overhuman: it is this sea, in this can
your great despising submerge itself.

“What is the greatest you could experience? It is the hour of the
great despising. The hour in. which even your happiness disgusts you
- and likewise your reason and your virtue.

‘The hour when you say: “What good is my happiness! It is pov- . |

erty and filth and wretched contentment. But my happiness si should
justify existence itself!”

“The hour when you say: “What good is my reason! Does it crave
knowing as the lion craves its food? It is Poverty and filth and
wretched contentment.”

‘The hour when you say: “What good.is my virtuel It has yet to set

hg eens

First Part ; 13

me raging. How tired I am of my good and. my evil! All that is

_ poverty and filth and wretched contentment!”

‘The hour when you say: “What good is my righteousness! I do
not see that I'am a blaze of hot coals. But one who is righteous is a
blaze of hot coals!”

‘The hour when you say: “What good is my pitying! Is not pity
the Cross upon which he who loves humankind is nailed? But my
pitying is no crucifixion.”

“Have you ever spoken thus? Have you ever cried thus? Ah, that I
might already have heard you cry thus! :

‘Not your sin—your frugality rails against Heaven, the very avarice
in your sin rails against Heaven!

‘Where then is the lightning* to lick you with its tongue? Where is
the madness with which you must be inoculated?

‘Behold, I teach to you the Overhuman: it is this lightning, it is
this madness!?— .

When Zarathustra had spoken thus, someone from among the
people shouted: ‘We’ve heard enough about the rope-dancer: now
let us see him too!’ And all tHe” ie people l: laughed at Zarathustra. But
thé rope-dancer, thinking the words concerned him,~began his
performance.

4

Zarathustra, however, looked at the people and was amazed. Then he
spoke thus:

‘The » human is a rope, fastened between beast and Overhuman—a
rope over an abyss.

‘A dangerous across, a dangerous on-the-way, a dangerous looking
back, a dangerous shuddering and standing still. :

‘Whats great in the human is thatitisa bridge and not a goal: what
can be loved in the human is that it is a gommg200e" and a going-under.

‘I love those who do not know how to live except by going tinder,
for they are those who go over and across. ;

‘T love the great despisers, for they are the great reverers and
arrows of yearning for the other shore.



--- Page 5 ---
14 Thus Spoke Zarathustra

‘I love those who do not first seek behind the stars for’a reason to

go under and be sacrifices, but, who sacrifice themselves to the earth,

that the earth may one day belong to the Overhuman.

‘I love him who lives in order to understand, and who wants ‘to :
understand so that one day the Overhuman may live. And thus he

wills his going-under. :
‘T love him who works and i invents, that he may build a house for

the Overhuman and prepare earth and animal | and plant for i its sake: .

for thus he wills his going-under.

‘I love him who loves his virtue: for virtue is the will to go under :

and an arrow of yearning.

‘I love him who holds back not one drop of spirit for himself, but
wants to be wholly the spirit of his virtue: thus he strides as spirit
across the bridge.

‘T love him who makes of his virtue his addiction and his undoing:

thus he wills for his virtte’s sake to live on and to live no more.

‘T love him who would not have too many virtues. One virtue is
more virtue than two, because it has more knots for one’ 8 undoing to
latch on to.

‘T love him whose soul squanders itself, who wants no thanks

and does not give back again: for he always bestows ys.and would n not —

preserve himself.*
‘Jove him who is ashamed when the dice fall in his favour, and
who then asks: Have I been playing falsely then?—for he wills his
own perishing.

‘I love him who casts golden words before his deeds and always
keeps even more than he promises: for he wills his going-under.

‘T love him who justifies those to come in the future and redeems
those gone in the past: for he wants to perish by those in the present.

‘Tlove him who chastens his God because he loves his God:* for the
wrath of his God must be his perishing.

‘T love him whose soul is deep even in being wounded, arid who
can perish from the smallest experience:-thus he goes gladly over the

- bridge.

‘T love him whose soul is overfull, so that he forgets himself,* and
all things are in him: thus all things become his going-under. -~

‘I love him who has a free spirit and a free heart: then his head
is simply the entrails of his heart,* yet his heart drives him to his
going-under.

First Part 15

‘I love all those who are as heavy drops, falling singly from the
dark cloud that hangs over the human: they herald the coming of
the lightning, and as heralds they also perish.

‘Behold, I am a herald of the lightning and a heavy drop’ from the
cloud: but this lightning is called Overhuman.’—

ae

5

When Zarathustra had spoken these words, he looked at the people
again and was silent. ‘There they stand,’ he said to his heart, ‘there
they laugh: they do not understand me, I am not the mouth for
these ears.

‘Must one first smash their ears before they learn to hear with
their eyes?* Must one rumble like kettledrums and preachers. of
repentance? Or do they only believe a stammerer?

' ‘They have something of which they are proud. But what do

‘they call that which makes them proud? Culture, they call it; it

distinguishes them from goatherds. _

‘Therefore they dislike hearing the word “despising” said of them.
So now I will speak to their pride.

‘So I will speak to them of what is most despicable: and that ys th js the
last human? nm)

“And thus spoke Zarathustra to the people:

‘The time has now come for the human to set a goal for itself. The
time has now come for the human to plant the seed of its highest hope.

‘Its soil is still rich enough for that. But this soil will some day
become poor from cultivation, and no tall tree will be able to grow
from it.
' ‘Alas! The time will come when the human will no longer shoot
the arrow of i its yearning over beyond the human, and the string of
its bow will have forgotten how to whirl .

‘I say to you: one must still have chaos within, in order to. give
birth to a dancing star. “I say to you: you still havé chaos within you.

‘Alas! The time will come when the human will give birth to no
more stars. Alas! There will come the time of the most despicable
human, who is no longer able to despise itself.

‘Behold! I show to youthe la Tast hun human,



--- Page 6 ---
16 Thus Spoke Zarathustra

‘ “What is love? What is creation? What is yearning? What i isa
star?” —thus asks the last human and then blinks.* —_\

‘For the earth has now become small, and upon it hops the last
human, who makes everything small. Its race is as inexterminable as,
the ground-flea; the last human lives the longest. ol al Gi 1p} 3

‘ “We have contrivéd happiness”—say the last humaris and trey
blink.

“They have left the regions where the e living was hard, for one:
needs the warmth. One still loves one? s ago and rubs-up .
against him: for one needs the warmth.

‘To fall ill and harbour mistrust is in their eyes sinful one must
proceed with care. A fool, whoever still stumbles over stones or
humans!

‘A little poison now and then: that makes for agreeable dreams.
And a lot of poison at the end, for an agreeable dying. :

‘One continues to work, for work is entertainment. But one takes
care lest the entertainment become a strain. ;

pile

Re Nea tes)

‘One no longer becomes poor or rich: both are too burdensome. - .

Who wants to rule any more? Who wants to obey? Both are too
burdensome.

‘No herdsman and one herd!* Everyone wants the same thing,

yy everyone is the same: whoever feels differently goes voluntarily into ~
© thé madhowse- ~~ .

‘ “Formerly the entire world was mad”—
blink. ~
‘One is clever and knows all that has happened: so there is no end
to their mockery. One still quarrels, but one soon makes up—else it .
is bad for the stomach. ‘ 7
‘One has one’s little pleasure forthe day and one’s little pleasure
for the night: but one honours ‘good healt!

‘ “We have invented “happiness” —say the last humans and they
blink.—’ Se

And here ended Zarathustra’s first speech, which is also called ‘the
Prologue’: for at this point the clamour and delight of the crowd
interrupted him. ‘Give us this last human, O Zarathustra’—so they
cried—‘Turn us into. these last humans! Then we give you the
Overhuman!’ And the people all jubilated and clucked with their
tongues. But Zarathustra became sad and said to his heart:

say their finest and they

First Part 7 :

‘They do not understand me: I am not the mouth for these ears.

‘Too long have I lived in the mountains, and too much have I
listened to streams and trees: now I talk to them as to goatherds.

‘Unmoved is my soul and bright as the mountains in the morning.
But they think I am cold and a mocker in fearful antics.

‘And now they behold me and laugh: and even as they laugh, they
still hate me. There is ice in their laughter.’

*

6

But then something happened that made every mouth mute and
every eye stare. For in the meantime the rope-dancer had begun his
work: he had emerged through a small door and was walking across
the rope, which had been stretched between two towers and thus
hung over the market-square and the people.* Just as he was halfway
across, the small door opened again and a motley fellow, looking like
a jester, jumped out and followed the first man with rapid steps. ‘On
you go, lame-foot,’ he cried in a terrifying voice. ‘On you go, you lazy
beast, smuggler, paleface! Else I shall tickle you with my heel! What
are you doing here between towers? You belong in the tower, and
should be locked up; you are blocking the way for one who is better
than you!’—And with each word he came closer and closer to him,
and when he was only one step behind him the terrible thing hap-
pened that made every mouth mute and every eye stare:—-he uttered
a shriek like a Devil and jumped over the man who was in his way.
But the latter, seeing his rival win like this, lost both his head and the
rope: he jettisoned his pole and shot faster than it, like a whirlwind
of arms and legs, down into the depths. The market-square and the
people resembled the sea when a storm comes in: everything flew
apart and around, and most of all at the place where the body was
about to land.

Zarathustra however stood still, and the body fell right beside
him, badly injured and broken, but not yet dead. After a while the
shattered man regained consciousness and saw Zarathustra kneeling
beside him. ‘What are you doing here?’ he said at last. ‘I have long
known. that the Devil would trip me up. Now he is dragging me off
to Hell: do you want to prevent him?’



