--- Page 1 ---
396 TALES AND SKETCHES

more he strode onward with elastic tread. Suddenly a corner
was turned, a blaze of light burst upon our sight, and we
stood before one of the huge suburban temples of Intemper-
ance—one of the palaces of the fiend, Gin. .

Tt was now nearly day-break; but a number of wretched
inebriates still pressed in and out of.the flaunting entrance.
With a half shriek of joy the old man forced a passage within,
resumed at once his original bearing, and stalked backward
and forward, without apparent object, among the throng. He
had not been thus long occupied, however, before a rush to
the doors gave token that the host was closing them for,the
night. It was something even more intense than despair that
I then observed upon the countenance of the singular being
whom I had watched so pertinaciously. Yet he did not hesi-.
tate in his career, but, with a mad energy, retraced his steps

he fled, while I followed him in the wildest amazement, res;
+ olute not to abandon a scrutiny in which I now felt an inter-
: est all-absorbing. The sun arose while we proceeded, and.
when we had once again reached that most thronged mart o!
the populous town, the street of the D—— Hotel, it pre
sented an appearance of human bustle and activity scarcel
inferior to what I had seen on the evening before. And here.
long, amid the momently increasing confusion, did I persis

fro, and during the day did not pass from out the turmoil o!
that street. And, as the shades of the second evening came on,
I grew wearied unto death, and, stopping fully in front of th
wanderer, gazed at him steadfastly in the face. He noticed m
not, but resumed his solemn walk, while I, ceasing to follow.
remained absorbed in contemplation. “This old man,” I sai
at length, “is the type and the genius of deep crime. He re:
fuses to be alone. He is the man of the crowd. It will be in v.
to follow; for I shall learn no more of him, nor of his deeds:
h The worst heart of the world is a grosser book than the ‘Hor:
: tulus Anime,’* and perhaps it is but one of the great mercie:
; of God that ‘er lasst sich nicht lesen?” —

*The “Hortulus Anime cum Oratiunculis Aligquibus Superndditis” o
Griinninger.

at once, to the heart of the mighty London. Long and swiftly.

in my pursuit of the stranger. But, as usual, he walked to and

The Murders in the Rue Morgue

What song the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles assumed
when he hid himself among women, although puzzling ques-
tions, are not beyond all conjecture.

Sir Thomas Browne

TT MENTAL FEATURES discoursed of as the analytical are,
A in themselves, but little susceptible of analysis. We appre-
ciate them only in their effects. We know of them, among
other things, that they are always to their possessor, when
inordinately possessed, a,source of the liveliest enjoyment. As
the strong man exults in his physical ability, delighting in
such exercises as call his muscles into action, so glories the
analyst in that moral activity which disentangles. He derives
pleasure from even the most trivial occupations bringing his
talent into play. He is fond of enigmas, of conundrums, of
hieroglyphics; exhibiting in his solutions of each a degree
of acumen which appears to the ordinary apprehension
preternatural. His results; brought about by the very soul and
essence of method, have, in truth, the whole air of intuition.
The faculty of re-solution is possibly much invigorated by
athematical study, and especially by that highest branch of
which, unjustly, and merely on account of its retrograde
erations, has been called, as if par excellence, analysis. Yet to
culate is not in itself to analyse. A chess-player, for exam-
le, does the one without effort at the other. It follows that
the game of chess, in its effects upon mental character, is
eatly misunderstood. I am not now writing a treatise, but
imply prefacing a somewhat peculiar narrative by observa-
ions very much at random; I will, therefore, take occasion to
sert that the higher powers of the reflective intellect are
ore decidedly and more usefully tasked by the unostenta-
us game of draughts than by all the elaborate frivolity of
ess. In this latter, where the pieces have different and bi-
ve motions, with various and variable values, what is only
mplex is mistaken (a not unusual error) for what is pro-
und. The attention is here called powerfully into play. If it
ig for an instant, an oversight is committed, resulting in

397



--- Page 2 ---
398 TALES AND SKETCHES
THE MURDERS IN THE RUB MORGUE

399

mere rule that the skill of the analyst is evinced. He makes, in
silence, a host of observations and inferences. So perhaps. “do
his companions; and the difference in the extent of the infor-
mation obtained lies not so much in the validity of the infer-
ence as in the quality of the observation. The necessary
nowledge is that of what to observe. Our player confines
himself not at all; nor, because the game is the object, do
he reject deductions from things external to the game He
Rlamines the countenance of his partner, comparing it care-
y with that of each of his opponents. He considers the
mode of assorting the cards in each hand; often countin
trump by trump, and honor by honor, through the glances
bestowed by their holders upon each. He notes every varia-

injury or defeat. The possible moves being not only manifold
but involute, the chances of such oversights are multiplied,
and in nine cases out of ten it is the more concentrative rather
than the mote acute player who conquers. In draughts, on
the contrary, where the moves are unique and have but little |
variation, the probabilities of inadvertence are diminished,
and the mere attention being left comparatively unemployed,
what advantages are obtained by either party are obtained by
superior acumen. To be less abstract—Let us suppose a game
of draughts where the pieces are reduced to four kings, and
where, of course, no oversight is to be expected. It is obvious
that here the victory can be decided (the players being at all
equal) only by some recherché movement, the result of some
strong exertion of the intellect. Deprived of ordinary re
sources, the analyst throws himself into the spirit of his op
ponent, identifies himself therewith, and not unfrequently.
sees thus, at a glance, the sole methods (sometimes indeed
absurdly simple ones) by which he may seduce into error o!
hurry into miscalculation.

Whist has long been noted for its influence upon what is
termed the calculating power; and men of the highest ordet
of intellect have been known to,take an apparently unaccount
able delight in it, while eschewing chess as frivolous. Beyo:
doubt there is nothing of a similar nature so greatly tasking
the faculty of analysis. The best chess-player in Christendori
may be little more than the best player of chess; but profi
ciency in whist implies capacity for success in all those m
important undertakings where mind struggles with min
When I say proficiency, I mean that perfection in the g;
which includes a comprehension of all the sources whe
legitimate advantage may be derived. These are not only m:
ifold but multiform, and lie frequently among recesses:
thought altogether inaccessible to the ordinary understan
ing. To observe attentively is to remember distinctly; and;
far, the concentrative chess-player will do very well at whi
while the rules of Hoyle (themselves based upon the m
mechanism of the game) are sufficiently and generally co

rehensible. Thus to have a retentive memory, and to prot
by “the book,” aré points commonly regarded as the sumy
tal of good playing. But it is in matters beyond the limits

ong up a trick he judges whether the person taking it can
a € another in the suit. He recognises what is played
rough feint, by the air with which it is thrown upon the
ble. A casual or inadvertent word; the accidental droppin:
turning of a card, with the accompanying anxiety or care,
sness in regard to its concealment; the counting of the
cks, with the order of their arrangement; embarrassment.
lesitation, eagerness or trepidation—all afford, to his appar.
ntly intuitive perception, indications of the true state oe af-
ts. The first two or three rounds having been played, he is
full possession of the contents of each hand, and thence-
rward puts down his cards with as absolute a precision of
pose as if the rest of the party: had turned outward the

usually manifested, and to which the ph: i

€ erroncously) have assigned a separate organ sue pesing

i primitive faculty, has been so frequently seen in those

rose intellect bordered otherwise upon idiocy, as to have
acted general observation among writers on ‘morals ‘Be-

€n ingenuity and the analytic ability there exists a



--- Page 3 ---
400 TALES AND SKETCHES

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 401

difference far greater, indeed, than that between the fancy
and the imagination, but of a character very strictly analo-
gous. It will be found, in fact, that the ingenious are always
fanciful, and the truly imaginative never otherwise than
analytic.

The narrative which follows will appear to the reader some-
what in the light of a commentary upon the propositions just
advanced.

Residing in Paris during the spring and part of the summer
of 18—, I there became acquainted with a Monsieur C. Au-
guste Dupin. This young gentleman was of an excellent—
indeed of an illustrious family, but, by a variety of untoward
events, had been reduced to such poverty that the energy of
his character succumbed beneath it, and he ceased to bestir

himself in the world, or to care for the retrieval of his for- :

tunes. By courtesy of his creditors, there still remained in
his possession a small remnant of his - patrimony; and,
upon the income arising from this, he managed, by means of
a rigorous economy, to procure the necessaries of life, with-
out troubling himself about its superfluities. Books, indeed,
were his sole luxuries, and in Paris these are easily ob-
tained.

Our first meeting was at an obscure library in the Rue
Montmartre, where the accident of our both being in search
of the same very rare and very remarkable volume brought us
into closer communion. We saw each other again and again..
I was deeply interested in the little family history which he
detailed to me with all that candor which a Frenchman in-
dulges whenever mere self is his theme. I was astonished, too,
at the vast extent of his reading; and, above all, I felt my soul
enkindled within me by the wild fervor, and the vivid fresh-
ness of his imagination. Seeking in Paris the objects I then
sought, I felt that the society of such a man would be to me
a treasure beyond price; and this feeling I frankly confided to
him. It was at length arranged that we should live together
during my stay in the city; and as my worldly circumstances
were somewhat less embarrassed than his own, I was permit-

ted to be at the expense of renting, and furnishing in a style.

‘which suited the rather fantastic gloom of our commo
temper, a time-eaten and grotesque mansion, long deserte

through superstitions into which we did not inquire, and tot-
tering to its fall in a retired and desolate portion of the Fau-
bourg St. Germain.

Had the routine of our life at this place been known to the
world, we should have been regarded as madmen—although,
perhaps, as madmen of a harmless nature. Our-seclusion was
perfect. We admitted no visitors. Indeed the locality of our
retirement had been carefully kept a secret from my own for-
mer associates; and it had been many years since Dupin had
ceased to know or be known in Paris. We existed within our-
selves alone. ;

It was a freak of fancy in my friend (for what else shall I
call it?) to-be enamored of the Night for her own sake; and
into this bizarrerie, as into all his others, I quietly fell; giving
myself up to his wild whims with a perfect abandon. The sa-
ble divinity would not herself dwell with us always; but we
could counterfeit her presence. At the first dawn of the morn-

_ ing we closed all the massy shutters of our old building, light-

ing a couple of tapers which, strongly perfumed, threw out
only the ghastliest and feeblest of rays. By the aid of these we
then busied our souls in dreams—reading, writing, or con-
versing, until warned by the clock of the advent of the true
Darkness. Then we sallied forth into the streets, arm in arm,
.continuing the topics of the day, or roaming far and wide
until a late hour, seeking, amid the wild lights and shadows
of the populous city, that infinity of mental excitement which
quiet observation can afford. _

At such times I could not help remarking and admiring

. (although from his rich ideality I had been prepared to expect

it) a peculiar analytic ability in Dupin. He seemed, too, to
ake an eager delight in its exercise—if not exactly in its dis-
play—and did not hesitate to confess the pleasure thus de-
ived. He boasted to me, with a low chuckling laugh, that
most men, in respect to himself, wore windows in their bo-
oms, and was wont to follow up such assertions by direct
and very startling proofs of his intimate knowledge of my
own. His manner at these moments was frigid and abstract;
his eyes were vacant in expression; while his voice, usually a
ich tenor, rose into a treble which would have sounded pet-
‘ulantly but for the deliberateness and entire distinctness of the



--- Page 4 ---
402 TALES AND SKETCHES THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 403

enunciation. Observing him in these moods, I often dwelt “It was the fruiterer,” replied my friend, “who brought you
meditatively upon the old philosophy of the Bi-Part Soul, and to the conclusion that the mender of soles was not of suffi-
amused myself with the fancy of a double Dupin—the cre- cient height-for Xerxes et id genus omne.” .
ative and the resolvent. “The fruiterer!'—you astonish me—I know no fiuiterer
Let it not be supposed, from what I have just said, that I whomsoever.”
am detailing any mystery, or penning any romance. What I ' “Fhe man who ran up against you as we entered the
have described in the Frenchman was merely the result of an street—it may have been fifteen minutes ago.”
excited, or perhaps of a diseased intelligence. But of the char- I now remembered that, in fact, a fruiterer, carrying upon
acter of his remarks at the periods in question an example will his head a large basket of apples, had nearly thrown me
best convey the idea. down, by accident, as we passed from the Rue C—— into
We were strolling one night down a long dirty street, in the the thoroughfare where we stood; but what this had to do
vicinity of the Palais Royal. Being both, apparently, occupied with Chantilly I could not possibly understand.
with thought, neither of us had spoken a syllable for fifteen There was not a particle of charlatanerie about Dupin. “T
minutes at least. All at once Dupin broke forth with these will explain,” he said, “and that you may comprehend all
words: ; clearly, we will first retrace the course of your meditations,
“Fie is a very little fellow, that’s true, and would do better from the moment in which I spoke to you until that of the
for the ThéAtre des Variétés.” rencontre with the fruiterer in question. The larger links of
“There can be no doubt of that,” I replied unwittingly, , the. chain run thus—Chantilly, Orion, Dr. Nichol, Epicurus,
and not at first observing (so much had I been absorbed Stereotomy, the street stones, the fruiterer.”
in reflection) the extraordinary manner in which the There are few persons who have not, at some period of
speaker had chimed in with my meditations. In an instant after- their lives, amused themselves in retracing the steps by which
ward I recollected myself, and my astonishment was pro- particular conclusions of their own minds have been attained,
found. The occupation is often full of interest; and he who attempts
“Dupin,” said I, gravely, “this is beyond my comprehen- it for the first time is astonished by the apparently illimitable
sion. I do not hesitate to say that I am amazed, and can ; distance and incoherence between the starting-point and the
scarcely credit my senses. How was it possible you should goal. What, then, must have been my amazement when I
know I was thinking of —-?” Here I paused, to ascertain heard the Frenchman speak what he had just spoken, and
beyond a doubt whether he really knew of whom I thought. when I could not help acknowledging that he had spoken the
« “of Chantilly,” said he, “why do you pause? You truth. He continued:
were remarking to yourself that his diminutive figure unfitted “We had been talking of horses, if I remember aright, just
him for tragedy.” before leaving the Rue C——. This was the last subject we
This was precisely what had formed the subject of my re- discussed. As we crossed into this street, a fruiterer, with a
flections. Chantilly. was a guondam cobbler of the Rue St. large basket upon his head, brushing quickly past us, thrust
Denis, who, becoming stage-mad, had attempted the réle of you upon a pile of paving-stoncs collected at a spot where the
Xerxes, in Crébillon’s tragedy so called, and been notoriously causeway is undergoing repair. You stepped upon one of the
Pasquinaded for his pains. loose fragments, slipped, slightly strained your ankle, ap-
“Tell me, for Heaven’s sake,” I exclaimed, “the method— peared vexed or sulky, muttered a few words, turned to look
method there is—by which you have been enabled to fathom at the pile, and then proceeded in silence. I was not particu-
my soul in this matter.” In fact I was even more startled th larly attentive to what you did; but observation has become
I would have been willing to express. . ith me, of late, a species of necessity.



--- Page 5 ---
TALES AND SKETCHES THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE
404

405
i i dition of the “Gazette des Tribunaux.” when the followin
« a es upon the ground—glancing, with a eC t > is
eealant corcesion ot the holes andl ruts in the pavement, (so Paragraphs arrested our attention. . .
Pp T P ou were still thinking of the stones,) until we EXTRAORDINARY MURDERS.—This morning, about three
that I saw y little alley called Lamartine, which has been o’clock, the inhabitants of the Quartier St. Roch were aroused
reached the ; of x criment with the overlapping and riv- from sleep. by a succession of terrific shrieks, issuing, appar-
pave hocks Frere your countenance brightened up, and, per- cntly, from the fourth story of a house in the Rue Morgue,
civ our lips move, I could not doubt that you murmured known to be in the sole occupancy of one Madame LEspa-
the wont sstereotomy? a term very affectedly applied to this naye, and her daughter, Mademoiselle Camille L’Espanaye.
s cies of pavement. I knew that you could not say to your- After some delay, occasioned by a fruitless attempt to procure
self ‘stereotomy’ without being brought to think of atomies, admission in the

usual manner, the gateway was broken in

ies of Epicurus; and since, when we dis- with a crowbar, and eight or ten of the neighbors entered,
an lene cies nce very long ago, I mentioned to you accompanied by two gendarmes. By this time the cries had
how singularly ‘Vet with how little notice, the vague guesses ceased; but, as the party rushed up the first flight of stairs,
of that noble Greek had met with confirmation in the late

two or more rough voices, in angry contention, were distin-

uid not avoid casting guished, and seemed to proceed from the upper part of the .
nebular es up sat the preat nebula in Orion, and I cer- house. As the second landing was reached, these sounds, also,
taink x ected that you would do so. You did look up; and I had ceased, and everything remained perfectly quiet. The
one owt acsuve d that I had correctly followed your steps. But party spread themselves, and hurried from room to room.
in that bitter tirade upon Chantilly, which appeared in yester- Upon arriving at a large back chamber in the fourth story,
in pa pa fe. the satirist, making some disgraceful allusions (the door of which, being found locked, with the key inside,
ry cobble: 1’s change of name upon assuming the buskin, was forced open,) a spectacle presented itself which struck
quoted a Latin line about which we have often conversed. I every one present not less with horror than with astonish-

: ment.
mean the line “The apartment was in the wildest disorder—the furniture
Perdidit antiquum litera prima sonum broken and thrown about in all

directions. There was only

one bedstead; and from this the bed had been removed, and

; i in reference to Orion, formerly: thrown into the middle of the floor. On a chair lay a razor,
Fad told you mat from certain rampeaces connected with. besmeared with blood. On the hearth were two or three long
this explanation I was aware that you could not have forgot- and thick tresses of grey human hair, also dabbled in blood,
ten it. It was clear, therefore, that you would not fail to com and seeming to have been pulled out by the roots. On the

bine the two ideas of Orion and Chantilly. That you di floor were found four
combine them I saw by the character of the smile whic
passed over your lips. You thought of the poor cobbler's m
i in your 5 ,
vow Paw you dey yourself up te sone fall height. 1 wa and had been, apparently, rifled, although many articles still
then .sure that you reflected upon the diminutive figure o emained in them. A small iron safe was discovered under the
Chantilly. At this point I interrupted your meditations to re ad). It was open, with the key still
mark that as, in fact, he was a very little fellow—that Chan: a intents beyond a few old lett ers, and
tilly—he would do better at the Thédtre des Variétés.” ther papers of little consequence.

Not long after this, we were looking over an evenin “Of Madame Lspanaye no traces were here seen; but an
> -

Napoleons, an ear-ring of topaz, three

» which stood in one corner, were open,



--- Page 6 ---
406 TALES AND SKETCHES THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 407

unusual quantity of soot being observed in the fire-place, a neighborhood, and has always resided there. The deceased
search was made in the chimney, and (horrible to relate!) the and her daughter had occupied the house in which the
corpse of the daughter, head downward, was dragged there- corpses were found, for more than six years. It was formerly
from; it having been thus forced up the narrow aperture for occupied by a,jeweller, who under-let the upper rooms to
a considerable distance. The body was quite warm. Upon ex- various persons. The house was the property of Madame L.
amining it, many excoriations were perceived, no doubt oc- She became dissatisfied with the abuse of the premises by her
casioned by the violence with which it had been thrust up tenant, and moved into them herself, refusing to let any por-
and disengaged. Upon the face were many severe scratches, tion. The old lady was childish. Witness had seen the daugh-
and, upon the throat, dark bmaises, and deep indentations of ter some five or six times during the six years. The two lived
finger nails, as if the deceased had been throttled to death. an exceedingly retired life—were reputed to have money.
. “After a thorough investigation of every portion of the Had heard it said among the neighbors that Madame L. told
house, without farther discovery, the party made its way into fortunes—did not believe it. Had never seen any person enter
a small paved yard in the rear of the building, where lay the the door except the old lady and her daughter, a porter once
corpse of the old lady, with her throat so entirely cut that, " or twice, and a physician some eight or ten times.
upon an attempt to raise her, the head fell off. The body, as “Many other persons, neighbors, gave evidence to the same
well as the head, was fearfully mutilated—the former so effect. No one was spoken of as frequenting the house. It was
much so as scarcely to retain any semblance of humanity. not known whether there were any living connexions of Ma-
“To this horrible mystery there is not as yet, we believe, the dame L. and her daughter. The shutters of the front windows
slightest clew.” were seldom opened. Those in the rear were always closed
The next day’s paper had these additional particulars. with the exception of the large back room, fourth story. The
“The Tragedy in the Rue Morgue. Many individuals have house was a good house—not very old.
been examined in relation to this most extraordinary and “Isidore Musét, gendarme, deposes that he was called to the
frightful affair.” [The word ‘affaire’ has not yet, in France, house about three o’clock in the morning, and found some
that levity of import which it conveys with us,] “but nothing _ twenty or thirty persons at the gateway, endeavoring to gain
whatever has transpired to throw light upon it. We give be- admittance. Forced it open, at length, with a bayonet—not
low all the material testimony elicited. with a crowbar. Had but little difficul
“Pauline Dubourg, |aundcess, deposes that she has known
both the deceased for three years, having washed for them

during that period. The old lady and her daughter seemed on gate was forced—and then suddenly ceased. They seemed to
good terms—very affectionate towards each other. They were be screams of some person (or persons) in great agony—were
excellent pay. Could not speak in regard to their mode or. loud and drawn out, not short and quick. Witness led the way
means of living. Believed that Madame L. told fortunes for a up stairs. Upon reaching the first landing, heard two voices
living. Was reputed to have money put by. Never met any. in loud and angry contention—the one a gruff voice, the
persons in the house when she called for the clothes or took: ther much shriller—a very strange voice. Could distinguish
them home. Was sure that they had no servant in employ. ome words of the former, which was that of a Frenchman.
There appeared to be no furniture in any part of the building ‘Was positive that it was not a woman’s voice. Could distin-
except in the fourth story. guish the words Sacré? and ‘diable” The shrill voice was that

“Pierre Moreau, tobacconist, deposes that he has been in: f a foreigner. Could not be sure whether it was the voice of

the habit of selling small quantities of tobacco and snuff to man or of a woman. Could not make out what was said.
Madame L’Espanaye for nearly four years. Was born in the ut believed the language to be Spanish. The state of the



--- Page 7 ---
408 TALES AND SKETCHES

xoom and of the bodies was described by this witness as we
described them yesterday.

“Henri Duval, a neighbor, and by trade a silver-smith, de-
poses that he was one of the party who figst entered the
house. Corroborates the testimony of Musét'in general. As
soon as they forced an entrance, they reclosed the door, to
keep out the crowd, which collected very fast, notwithstand-
ing the lateness of the hour. The shrill voice,- this witness
thinks, was that of an Italian. Was certain it was not French.
Could not be sure that it was a man’s voice. It might have
been a woman’s. Was not acquainted with the Italian lan-
guage. Could not distinguish the words, but was convinced
by the intonation that the speaker was an Italian. Knew Ma-
dame L. and her daughter. Had conversed with both fre-
quently. Was sure that the shrill voice was not that of either
of the deceased. :

“ Odenheimer, restaurateur. This witness volunteered
his testimony. Not speaking French, was examined through
an interpreter. Is a native of Amsterdam. Was passing the
house at the time of the shrieks. They lasted for several .
minutes— probably ten. They were long and loud—very aw-
ful and distressing. Was one of those who entered the build-
ing. Corroborated the previous evidence in every respect but
one. Was sure that the shrill voice was that of a man—of a
Frenchman. Could not distinguish the words uttered. They
were loud and quick—unequal—spoken apparently in fear as
well as in anger. The voice was harsh—not so much shrill as
harsh. Could not call it a shrill voice. The gruff voice said
repeatedly ‘Sacré,? ‘diable, and once ‘mon Dieu.?

“Jules Mignaud, banker, of the firm of Mignand et Fils, Rue
Deloraine. Is the elder Mignaud. Madame L’Espanaye had
some property. Had opened an account with his banking
house in the spring of the year —— (eight years previously).
Made frequent deposits in small sums. Had checked for noth-

ing until the third day before her death, when she took out |

in person the sum of 4000 francs. This sum was paid in gold,
and a clerk sent home with the money.
“Adolphe Le Bon, clerk to Mignand et Fils, deposes that on

the day in question, about noon, he accompanied Madame |

LEspanaye to her residence with the 4000 francs, put up in

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 409

two bags. Upon the door bein i
8 Opened, Mademoiselle L. ap-
peared and took from his hands one of the bags, while the
old aay vieved him of the other. He then bowed and de-
Partec. Did not see any person in the street i i
a bye-street—very lonel seer are Kine, Tei
“William Bird, tailor deposes that he was
5 5 one of th
who entered the house, Is an Englishman. Has lived in Dane
two years. Was one of the first to ascend the stairs. Heard the
voices in contention. The gruff voice was that of a French-
man. Could make Out several words, but cannot now remem-
ber all. Heard distinctly ‘saeré? and Gnon Dien? There was a
‘sound at the moment as if of several Persons struggling —a

been a wornan’s voice. Does not understand German

Our of the above-named witnesses bein, recall d, de-
posed that the door of the chamber in which ‘was found the
body of Mademoiselle L. was locked on the inside when the

two rooms was closed, but not locked. The door leadin fr
the front room into the Passage was locked, with the Key on
the inside. A small room in the front of the house, on the

neys. The house was a four sto i
ry one, with garrets -
strdes.) A trap-door on the roof was nailed down very

some as long as five. The door was o ith di
n 1 pened with difficul
‘Alfonzo Garcio, undertaker, deposes that he resides in the:
Rue Morgue. Is a native of Spain. Was one of the Party who



--- Page 8 ---
410 TALES AND SKETCHES

entered the house. Did not proceed up stairs. Is nervous, and
was apprehensive of the consequences of agitation. Heard the
voices in contention. The gruff voice was that of a French-
man. Could not distinguish what was said. The shrill voice
was that of an Englishman—is sure of this. Does not under-
stand the English language, but judges by the intonation.
“Alberto Montani, contectioner, deposes that he was among
the first to ascend the stairs. Heard the voices in question.
The gruff voice was that of a Frenchman. Distinguished sev-
eral words. The speaker appeared to be expostulating. Could
not make out the words of the shrill voice. Spoke quick and

unevenly. Thinks it the voice of a Russian. Corroborates the ,

general testimony. Is an Italian. Never conversed with a na-
tive of Russia.

“Several witnesses, recalled, here testified that the chimneys
of all the rooms on the fourth story were too narrow to admit
the passage of a human being. By ‘sweeps’ were meant cylin-
drical sweeping-brushes, such as are employed by those who
clean chimneys. These brushes were passed up and down
every flue in the house. There is no back passage by which
any one could have descended while the party proceeded up
stairs. The body of Mademoiselle L’Espanaye was so firmly
wedged in the chimney that it could not be got down until
four or five of the party united their strength.

“Paul Dumas, physician, deposes that he was called to view
the bodies about day-break. They were both then lying on
the sacking of the bedstead in the chamber where Mademoi-
selle L. was found. The corpse.of the young lady was much
bruised and excoriated. The fact that it had been thrust up
the chimney would sufficiently account for these appearances.
The throat was greatly chafed. There were several deep

*

scratches just below the chin, together with a series of livid ;
spots which were evidently the impression of fingers. The face

was fearfully discolored, and the eye-balls protruded. The
tongue had been partially bitten through. A large bruise was
discovered upon the pit of the stomach, produced, appar-
ently, by the pressure of a knee. In the opinion of M. Dumas,
Mademoiselle L’Espanaye had been throttled to death by
some person or persons unknown. The corpse of the mother
was horribly mutilated. All the bones of the right leg and arm

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 41

were more or less shattered. The left tibia much splintered, as
well as all the ribs of the left side. Whole body dreadfully
bruised and discolored. It was not possible to say how the
injuries had been inflicted. A heavy club of wood, or a broad
‘bar of iron—a chair—any large, heavy, and obtuse weapon
would have produced such results, if wielded by the hands of
a very powerful man. No woman could have inflicted the
blows with any weapon. The head of the deceased, when seen
by witness, was entirely separated from the body, and was
also greatly shattered. The throat had evidently been cut with
some very sharp instrument—probably with a razor.

“Alexandre Etienne, surgeon, was called with M. Dumas to
view the bodies. Corroborated the testimony, and the opin-”
ions of M. Dumas.

“Nothing farther of importance was elicited, although sev-
eral other persons were examined. A murder so mysterious,
and so perplexing in all its particulars, was never before com-
mitted in Paris—if indeed a murder has been committed at
all. The police are entirely at fault—an unusual occurrence in
affairs of this nature. There is not, however, the shadow of a
clew apparent.” ‘

The evening edition of the Paper stated that the greatest
excitement still continued in the Quartier St. Roch—that the
premises in question had been carefully re-searched, and fresh
examinations of witnesses instituted, but all to no purpose. A
postscript, however, mentioned that Adolphe Le Bon had
been arrested and imprisoned—although nothing appeared
to criminate him, beyond the facts already detailed.

Dupin seemed singularly interested in the progress of this
affair—at least so I judged from his manner, for he made no
comments. It was only after the announcement that Le Bon
had been imprisoned, that he asked me my opinion respecting
the murders. :

I could merely agree with all Paris in considering them an
insoluble mystery. I saw no means by which it would be pos-
sible to trace the murderer.

“We must not judge of the means,” said Dupin, “by this
shell of an examination. The Parisian police, so much extolled
for acumen, are cunning, but no more. There is no method
in their proceedings, beyond the method of the moment.



--- Page 9 ---
412 TALES AND SKETCHES

They make a vast parade of measures; but, not unfrequently,
these are so ill adapted to the objects proposed, as to put us
in mind of Monsieur Jourdain’s calling for his robe-de-
chambre— pour mieux entendre la musique. The results attained
by them are not unftequently surprising, but, for the most
part, are brought about -by simple diligence and activity.
When these qualities are unavailing, their schemes fail. Vi-
docq, for example, was a good guesser, and a persevering
man. But, without educated thought, he erred continually by
the very intensity of his investigations. He impaired his vision
by holding the object too close. He might see, perhaps, one
or two points with unusual clearness, but in so doing he, nec-
essarily, lost sight of the matter as a whole. Thus there. is such
a thing as being too profound. Truth is not always in a well.
In fact, as regards the more important knowledge, I do be-
lieve that she is invariably superficial. The depth lies in the
valleys where we seek her, and not upon the mountain-tops
where she is found. The modes and sources of this kind of
error are well typified in the contemplation of the heavenly
bodies. To look at a star by glances—to view it in a side-long
way, by turning toward it the exterior portions of the retina
(more susceptible of feeble impressions of light than the in-
terior), is to behold the star distinctly—is to have the best
appreciation of its lustre—a lustre which grows dim just in
Proportion as we turn our vision filly upon it- A greater
number of rays actually fall upon. the eye in the latter case,
but, in the former, there is the more refined capacity for com-
prehension. By undue profundity we perplex and enfeeble
thought; and it is possible to make even Venus herself vanish
from the firmament by a scrutiny too sustained, too concen-
trated, or too direct.

“As for these murders, let us enter into some examinations
for ourselves, before we make up an opinion respecting them.
An inquiry will afford us amusement,” [I thought this an odd
term, so applied, but said nothing] “and, besides, Le Bon
once rendered me a service for which J am not ungrateful. We
will go and see the premises with our own eyes. I know G-—,
the Prefect of Police, and shall have no difficulty in obtaining
the necessary pérmission.”

The permission was obtained, and we proceeded at once to

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 413

the Rue Morgue. This is one of those miserable thorough-
fares which intervene between the Rue Richelieu and the Rue
St. Roch. It was late in the afternoon when we reached it; as
this quarter is at a great distance from that in which we re-
sided. The house was readily found; for there were still many
persons gazing up at the closed shutters, with an objectless
curiosity, from the opposite side of the way. It was an ordi-
nary Parisian house, with a gateway, ‘on one side of which
was a glazed watch-box, with a sliding panel in the window,
indicating a loge de concierge. Before going in we walked up
the street, turned down an alley, and then, again turning.
passed in the rear of the building—Dupin, meanwhile, cx.
amining the whole neighborhood, as well as the house, with
a minuteness of attention for which I could see no possible
object.

Retracing our steps, we came again to the front of the
dwelling, rang, and, having shown our credentials, were ad-
mitted by the agents in charge. We went up stairs—into the
chamber where the body of Mademoiselle L’Espanaye had
been found, and where both the deceased still lay. The disor-
ders of the room had, as usual, been suffered to. exist. T saw
nothing beyond what had been stated in the “Gazette des Tri-
bunaux.” Dupin scrutinized every thing—not excepting the
bodies of the victims. We then went into the other rooms
and into the yard; a gendarme accompanying us throughout.
The examination occupied us until dark, when we took our
departure. On our way home my companion stepped in for a
moment at the office of one of the daily papers.

I have said that the whims of my friend were manifold, and
that Je les ménageais:—for this phrase there is no English
equivalent. It was his humor, now, to decline all conversation
on the subject of the murder, until about noon the next day.
He then asked me, suddenly, if I had observed any thing pe-
culiar at the scene of the atrocity.

There was something in his manner of emphasizing the
word “peculiar,” which caused me to shudder, without know-
ing why.

“No, nothing peculiar,” T said; “nothin
than we both saw stated in the paper.” SMOG, at least

“The ‘Gazette,’ ” he replied, “has not entered, I fear, into



--- Page 10 ---
AN TALES AND SKETCHES

the unusual horror of the thing. But dismiss the idle opinions
of this print. It appears to me that this mystery is considered
insoluble, for the very reason which should cause it to be re-
garded as easy of solution—I mean for the outré character of
its features. The police are confounded by the seeming ab-
sence of motive—not for the murder itself—but for the
atrocity of the murder. They are puzzled, too, by the seeming
impossibility of reconciling the voices heard in contention,
with the facts that no one was discovered up stairs but the
assassinated Mademoiselle LEspanaye, and that there were
no means of egress without the notice of the party ascending.
The wild disorder of the room; the corpse thrust, with the
head downward, up the chimney; the frightful mutilation of
the body of the old lady; these considerations, with those just
mentioned, and others which I need not mention, have suf-
ficed to paralyze the powers, by putting completely at fault
the boasted acumen, of the government agents. They have
fallen into the gross but common error of confounding the
unusual with the abstruse. But it is by these deviations from
the plane of the ordinary, that reason feels its way, if at all, in
its search for the true. In investigations such as we are now
pursuing, it should not be so much asked ‘what has oc-
curred,’ as ‘ what has occurred that has never occurred before?
In fact, the facility with which I shall arrive, or have arrived,
at the solution of this mystery, is in the direct ratio of its
apparent insolubility in the eyes of the police.”

I stared at the speaker in mute astonishment.

“I am now awaiting,” continued he, looking toward the
door of our apartment—“I am now awaiting a person who,
although perhaps not the perpetrator of these butcheries,
must have been in some measure implicated in their perpetra-
tion. Of the worst portion of the crimes committed, it is
probable that he is innocent. I hope that I am right in this
supposition; for upon it I build my expectation of reading the
entire riddle. I look for the man here—in this room—every

‘moment. It is true that he may not arrive; but the probability
is that he will. Should he come, it will be necessary to detain
him. Here are pistols; and we both know how to use them
when occasion demands their use.”

I took the pistols, scarcely knowing what I did, or believing

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 415

what I heard, while Dupin went on, very much as if in a
soliloquy. I have already spoken of his abstract manner at
such times. His discourse was addressed to myself; but his
voice, although by no means loud, had that intonation which .
is commonly employed in speaking to some one at a great
distance. His eyes, vacant in expression, regarded only the
wall.

“That the voices heard in contention,” he said, “by the
party upon the stairs, were not the voices of the women
themselves, was fully proved by the evidence. This relieves us
of all doubt upon the question whether the old lady could
have first destroyed the daughter, and afterward. have com-
mitted suicide. I speak of this point chiefly for the sake of
method; for the strength of Madame LEspanaye would have
been utterly unequal to the task of thrusting her daughter’s
corpse up the chimney as it was found; and the nature of the
wounds upon her own person entirely preclude the idea of
self-destruction. Murder, then, has been committed by some
third party; and the voices of this third party were those
heard in contention. Let me now advert—not to the whole
testimony respecting these voices—but to what was peculiar
in that testimony. Did you observe any thing peculiar about
ite”

I remarked that, while all the witnesses agreed in supposing
the gruff voice to be that of a Frenchman, there was much
disagreement in regard to the shrill, or, as one individual
termed it, the harsh voice.

“That was the evidence itself,” said Dupin, “but it was not
the peculiarity of the evidence. You have observed nothing
distinctive. Yet there was something to be observed. The wit-
nesses; as you remark, agreed about the gruff voice; they were
here unanimous. But in regard to the shrill voice, the pecu-
liarity is—not that they disagreed—but that, while an Italian,
an Englishman, a Spaniard, a Hollander, and a Brenchman
attempted to describe it, each one spoke of it as that of a
foreigner. Each is sure that it was not the voice of one of his
own countrymen. Each likens it—not to the voice of an in-
dividual of any nation with whose language he is conver-
sant—but the converse. The Frenchman supposes it the voice
of a Spaniard, and ‘might have distinguished some words had



--- Page 11 ---
416 TALES AND SKETCHES

he been acquainted with the Spanish? The Dutchman maintains
it to have been that of a Frenchman; but we find it stated that
‘not understanding French this witness was examined through an
interpreter” The Englishman thinks it the voice of a German,
and ‘does not understand German. The Spaniard ‘is sure’ that
it was that of an Englishman, but Sudges by the intonation’
altogether, ‘as he has no knowledge of the English? The Italian
believes it the voice of a Russian, but ‘has never conversed with
a native of Russia.” A second Frenchman differs, moreover,
with the first, and is positive that the voice was that of an
Italian; but, not being cognizant of that tongue, is, like the
Spaniard, ‘convinced by the intonation.’ Now, how strangely
unusual must that voice have really been, about which such
testimony as this could have been elicited!—in whose tones,
even, denizens of the five great divisions of Europe could re-
cognise nothing familiar! You will say that it might have been
the voice of an Asiatic—of an African. Neither Asiatics nor
Africans abound in Paris; but, without denying the inference,
I will now merely call your attention to three points. The
voice is termed by one witness ‘harsh rather than shrill.” It is
represented by two others to have been ‘quick and unequal?
No words—no sounds resembling words—were by any wit-
ness mentioned as distinguishable.

“I know not,” continued Dupin, “what impression I may
have made, so far, upon your own understanding; but I do
not hesitate to say that legitimate deductions even from this
portion of the testimony—the portion respecting the gruff
and shrill voices—are in themselves sufficient to engender a
suspicion which should give direction to all farther progress
in the investigation of the mystery. I said ‘legitimate deduc-
tions;’ but my meaning is not thus fully expressed. I designed
to imply that the deductions are the sole propér ones, and that
the suspicion arises inevitably from them as the single result.
What the suspicion is, however, I will not say just yet. I
merely wish you to bear in mind that, with myself, it was
sufficiently forcible to give a definite form—a certain ten-
dency—to my inquiries in the chamber.

“Let us now transport ourselves, in fancy, to this chamber.
What shall we first seek here? The means of egress employed
by the murderers. It is not too much to say that neither of us

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 417

believe in praternatural events. Madame and Mademoiselle
LEspanaye were not destroyed by spirits. The doers of the
deed were material, and escaped materially. Then how? For-_
tunately, there is but one mode of reasoning upon the point,
and that mode must lead us to a definite decision.—Let us
examine, each by each, the possible means of egress. It is clear
that the assassins were in the room where Mademoiselle L’Es-
panaye was found, or at least in the room adjoining, when
the party ascended the stairs. It is then only from these two
apartments that we have to seek issues. The police have laid
bare the floors, the ceilings, and the masonry of the walls, in
every direction. No secret issues could have escaped their vig-
ilance. But, not trusting to their eyes, I examined with my
own. There were, then, wo secret issues. Both doors leadin:
from the rooms into the passage were securely locked, with
the keys inside. Let us turn to the chimneys. These, although
of ordinary width for some eight or ten feet above the
hearths, will not admit, throughout their extent, the body of
a large cat. The impossibility of egress, by means already
stated, being thus absolute, we are reduced to the windows.
Through those of the front room no one could have escaped
without notice from the crowd in the street. The murderers
must have passed, then, through those of the back room.
Now, brought to this conchision in so unequivocal a manner
as we are, it is not’our part, as reasoners, to reject it on ac-
count of apparent impossibilities. It is only left for us to
prove that these apparent ‘impossibilities’ are, in reality, not
such.

“There are two windows in thie chamber. One of them is
unobstructed by furniture, and is wholly visible. The lower
portion of the other is hidden from view by the head of the
unwieldy bedstead which is thrust close up against it. The
former was found securely fastened from within. It resisted
the utmost force of those who endeavored to raise it. A large
gimlet-hole had been pierced in its frame to the left, and a
very stout nail was found fitted therein, nearly to the head.
Upon examining the other window,-a similar nail was seen
similarly fitted in it; and a vigorous attempt to raise this sash
failed also. The police were now entirely satisfied that egress
had not been in these directions. And, therefore, it was



--- Page 12 ---
418 TALES AND SKETCHES

thought a matter of supererogation to withdraw the nails and
open the windows.

“My own examination was somewhat more particular, and
was so for the reason I have just given—because here it was,
I knew, that all apparent impossibilities must be proved to be
not such in reality,

“T proceeded to think thus— 4 posteriori. The murderers did
escape from one of these windows. This being so, they could
not have re-fastened the sashes from the inside, as they were
found fastened;—the consideration which put a_ stop,
through its obviousness, to the scrutiny of the police in this
quarter. Yet the sashes were fastened. They must, then, have
the power of fastening themselves. There was no escape from
this conclusion. I stepped to the unobstructed casement,
withdrew the nail with some difficulty, and attempted to raise
the sash. It resisted all my efforts, as I had anticipated. A
concealed spring must, I now knew, exist; and this corrobo-
ration of my idea convinced me that my premises, at least,
were correct, however mysterious still appeared the circum-
stances attending the nails. A careful search soon brought to
light the hidden spring. I pressed it, and, satisfied with the
discovery, forbore to upraise the sash.

“I now replaced the nail and regarded it attentively. A per-
son passing out through this window might have reclosed it,
and the spring would have caught—but the nail could not
have been replaced. The conclusion was plain, and again nar-
rowed in the field of my investigations. The assassins must
have escaped through the other window. Supposing, then,
the springs upon each sash to be the same, as was probable,
there must be found a difference between the nails, or at least
between the modes of their fixture. Getting upon the sacking
of the bedstead, I looked over the head-board minutely at the
second casement. Passing my hand down behind the board, I
readily discovered and pressed the spring, which was, as I had
supposed, identical in character with its neighbor. I now
looked at the nail. It was as stout as the other, and apparently
fitted in in the same manner—driven in nearly up to the
head.

“You will say that I was puzzled; but, if you think so, you
must have misunderstood the nature of the inductions. To use

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 419

a sporting phrase, I had not been once ‘at fault The scent
had never for an instant been lost. There was no flaw in any
link of the chain. I had traced the secret to its ultimate re-
sult,—and that result was the nail. It had, I say, in every
tespect, the appearance of its fellow in the other window; but
this fact was an absolute nullity (conclusive as it might seem
to be) when compared with the consideration that here, at
this point, terminated the clew. ‘There must be something
wrong,’ I said, ‘about the nail.” I touched it; and the head,
with about a quarter of an inch of the shank, came off in my
fingers. The rest of the shank was in the gimlet-hole, where it
had been broken off. The fracture was an old one (for ‘its
edges were incrusted with must), and had apparently been ac-
complished by the blow of a hammer, which had partially
imbedded, in the top of the bottom sash, the head portion of
the nail. I now carefully replaced this head portion in the in-
dentation whence I had taken it, and the resemblance: to a
perfect nail was complete—the fissure was invisible. Pressing
the spring, I gently raised the sash for a few inches; the head
went up with it, remaining firm in its bed. I closed the win-
dow, and the'semblance of the whole nail was again perfect.

“The riddle, so far, was now unriddled. The assassin had
escaped through the window which looked upon the bed. ©
Dropping of its own accord upon his exit (or perhaps pur-
posely closed), it had become fastened by the spring; and it
was the retention of this spring which had been mistaken by
the police for that of the nail,—farther inquiry being thus
considered unnecessary. .

“The next question is that of the mode of descent. Upon
this point I had been satisfied in my walk with you around
the building. About five feet and a half from the casement in
question there runs a lightning-rod. From this rod it would
have been impossible for any one to reach the window itself,
to say nothing of entering it. I observed, however, that the
shutters of the fourth story were of the peculiar kind called
by Parisian carpenters ferrades—a kind rarely employed at the
present day, but frequently seen upon very old mansions at
Lyons and Bourdeaux. They are in the form of an ordinary
door, (a single, not a folding door) except that the upper half
is latticed or worked in open trellis—thus affording an excel-



--- Page 13 ---
420 TALES AND SKETCHES

lent hold for the hands. In the present instance these shutters
are fully three feet and a half broad. When we saw them from
the rear of the house, they were both about half open—that
is to say, they stood off at right angles from the wall. It is
probable that the police, as well as myself, examined the back
of the tenement; but, if so, in looking at these ferrades in the
line of their breadth (as they must have done), they did not
perceive this great breadth itself, Or, at all events, failed to
take it into due consideration. In fact, having once satisfied
themselves that no egress could have been made in this
quarter, they would naturally bestow here a very cursory ex-
amination. It was clear to me, however, that the shutter be-
longing to the window at the head of the bed, would, if
swung fully back to the wall, reach to within two feet of the
lightning-rod. It was also evident that, by exertion of a very

" unusual degree of activity and Courage, an entrance into the
window, from the rod, might have been thus effected, —By
reaching to the distance of two feet and a half (we now sup-
pose the shutter open to its whole extent) a robber might
have taken a firm grasp upon the trellis-work. Letting go,
then, his hold upon the rod, Placing his feet securely against
the wall, and springing boldly from it, he might have swung
the shutter so as to close it, and, if we imagine the window
Open at the time, might even have swung himself into the
room.

“I wish you to bear. especially in mind that I have spoken
of a very unusual degree of activity as requisite to success in
so hazardous and so difficult a feat. It is my design to show
you, first, thar the thing might possibly have been accom-
plished: —but, secondly and chiefly, 1 wish to impress upon
your understanding the very extraordinary—the almost
preternatural character of that agility which could have ac-
complished it. ,

“You will say, no-doubt, using the language of the law, that
‘to make out my case,’ I should rather undervalue, than insist
upon a full estimation of the activity required in this matter,
This may be the practice in law, but it is not the usage of
reason. My ultimate object is only the truth. My immediate
purpose is to lead you to place in juxta-position, that very
unusual activity of which I have just spoken, with that very

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 421

peculiar shrill (or harsh) and unequal voice, about whose na-
tionality no two persons could be found to agree, and in
whose utterance no syllabification could be detected.”

At these words a vague and half-formed conception of the
meaning of Dupin flitted over my mind. I seemed to be upon
the verge of comprehension, without power to compre-
hend—as men, at times, find themselves upon the brink of
remembrance, without being able, in the end, to remember.
My friend went on with his discourse.

“You will see,” he said, “that I have shifted the question
from the mode of egress to that of ingress. It was my design
to suggest the idea that both were effected in the same man-
ner, at the same point. Let us now revert to the interior of
the room. Let us survey the appearances here. The drawers of
the bureau, it is said, had been rifled, although many articles
of apparel still remained within them. The conchision here is
absurd. It is a mere guess—a very silly one—and no more.
How are we to know that the articles found in the drawers
were not all these drawers had originally contained? Madame
LEspanaye and her daughter lived an exceedingly retired
life—saw no company—seldom went out—had littie use for
numerous changes of habiliment. Those found were at least
of as good quality as any likely to be possessed by these ladies.
Ifa thief had taken any, why did he not take the best—why
did he not take all? In a word, why did he abandon four
thousand francs in gold to encumber himself with a bundle
of linen? The gold was abandoned. Nearly the whole sum
mentioned by Monsieur Mignaud, the banker, was discov-
ered, in bags, upon the floor. I wish you, therefore, to discard
from your thoughts the blundering idea of motive, engen-
dered in the brains of the police by that portion of the evi-
dence which speaks of money delivered at the door of the
house. Coincidences ten times as remarkable as this (the deliy-
ery of the money, and murder committed within three days
-upon the party receiving it), happen to all of us every hour of
our lives, without attracting even momentary notice. Coinci-
dences, in general, are great stumbling-blocks in the way of
that class of thinkers who have been educated to know noth-
ing of the theory of probabilities—that theory to which the
most glorious objects of human research are indebted for the



--- Page 14 ---
422, TALES AND SKETCHES

most glorious of illustration. In the present instance, had the
gold been gone, the fact of its delivery three days before
would have formed something more than a coincidence. It
would have been corroborative of this idea of motive. But,
under the real circumstances of the case, if we are to suppose
gold the motive of this outrage, we must also imagine the
perpetrator so vacillating an idiot as to have abandoned his
gold and his motive together.

“Keeping now steadily in mind the points to which I have
drawn your attention—that peculiar voice, that unusual agil-
ity, and that startling absence of motive in a murder so sin-
gularly atrocious as this—let us glance at the butchery itself.
Here is a woman strangled to death by manual strength, and
thrust up a chimney, head downward. Ordinary assassins em-
ploy no such modes of murder as this. Least of all, do they
thus dispose of the murdered. In the manner of thrusting the
corpse up the chimney, you will admit that there was some-
thing excessively outvé—something altogether irreconcilable
with our common notions of human action, even when we
suppose the actors the most depraved of men. Think, too,
how great must have been that strength which: could have
thrust the body up such an aperture so forcibly thar the
united vigor of several persons was found barely sufficient to
drag it down!

“Tum, now, to other indications of the employment of a
vigor most marvellous. On the hearth were thick tresses—
very thick tresses—of grey human hair. These had been torn
out by the roots. You are aware of the great force necessary
in tearing thus from the head even twenty or thirty hairs to-
gether. You saw the locks in question as well as myself. Their
roots (a hideous sight!) were clotted with fragments of the
flesh of the scalp—sure token of the prodigious power which
had been exerted in uprooting perhaps half a million of hairs
at a time. The throat of the old lady was not merely cut, but
the head absolutely severed from the body: the instrument
was a mere razor. I wish you also to look at the brutal feroc-
‘ity of these deeds. Of the bruises upon the body of Madame
Lspanaye I do not speak. Monsieur Dumas, and his worthy
coadjutor Monsieur Etienne, have Pronounced that they were
inflicted by some obtuse instrument; and so far these gentle-

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 423

men are very correct. The obtuse instrument was clearly the

stone pavement in the yard, upon which the victim had fallen.
from the window which looked in upon the bed. This idea,

however simple it may now seem, escaped the police for the

same reason that the breadth of the shutters escaped them—

because, by the affair of the nails, their perceptions had been

hermetically sealed against the possibility of the windows hav-

ing ever been opened at all. .

“If now, in addition to all these things, you have properly
reflected upon the odd disorder of the chamber, we have
gone so far as to combine the ideas of an agility astounding,
a strength superhuman, a ferocity brutal, a butchery without
motive, a grotesquerie in horror absolutely alien from human-
ity, and a voice foreign in tone to the ears of men of many
nations, and devoid of all distinct or intelligible syllabifica-
tion. What result, then, has ensued? What impression have I
made upon your fancy?” ;

I felt a creeping of the flesh as Dupin asked me the ques-
tion. “A madman,” I said, “has done this deed—some raving
maniac, escaped from a neighboring Maison de Santé.”

“In some respects,” he replied, “your idea is not irrelevant.
But the voices of madmen, even in their wildest paroxysms,
are never found to tally with that peculiar voice heard upon
the stairs. Madmen are of some nation, and their language,
however incoherent in its words, has always the coherence of
syllabification. Besides, the hair of a madman is not such as I
now hold in my hand. I disentangled this little tuft from the
rigidly clutched fingers of Madame L’Espanaye. Tell me what
you can make of it.” oo,

“Dupin!” T said, completely unnerved; “this hair is most
unusual—this is no human hair.”

“TI have not asserted that it is,” said he; “but, before we
decide this point, I wish you to glance at the little sketch I
have here traced upon this paper. It is a fac-simile drawing of
what has been described in one portion of the testimony as
‘dark bruises, and deep indentations of finger nails,’ upon the
throat of Mademoiselle LEspanaye, and in another, (by
Messrs. Dumas and Etienne,) as a ‘series of livid spots, evi-
dently the impression of fingers. ;

“You will perceive,” continued my friend, spreading out the



--- Page 15 ---
424, TALES AND SKETCHES

paper upon the table before us, “that this drawing gives the
idea of a firm and fixed hold. There is no slipping apparent.
Each finger has retained—possibly until the death of the vic-
tim—the fearful grasp by which it originally imbedded itself.
Attempt, now, to place all your fingers, at the same time, in
the respective impressions as you see them.”

I made the attempt in vain.

“We are possibly not giving this matter a fair trial,” he said.
“The paper is spread out upon a plane surface; but the human
throat is cylindrical. Here is a billet of wood, the circumfer-
ence of which is about that of the throat. Wrap the drawing
around it, and try the experiment again.”

I did so; but the difficulty was even more obvious than
before. “This,” I said, “is the mark of no human hand.”

“Read now,” replied Dupin, “this passage from Cuvier.”

Tt was a minute anatomical and generally descriptive ac-
count of the large fulvous Ourang-Outang of the East Indian
Islands. The gigantic stature, the prodigious strength and ac-
tivity, the wild ferocity, and the imitative propensities of these
mammalia are sufficiently well known to all. I understood the
full horrors of the murder at once.

“The description of the digits,” said I, as I made an end of
reading, “is in exact accordance with this drawing, I sce that
no animal but an Ourang-Outang, of the species here men-
tioned, could have impressed the indentations as you have
traced them. This tuft of tawny hair, too, is identical in char-
acter with that of the beast of Cuvier. But I cannot possibly
comprehend the particulars of this frightful mystery. Besides,
there were two voices heard in contention, and one of them
was unquestionably the voice of a Frenchman.”

“True; and you will remember an expression attributed al-
most unanimously, by the evidence, to this voice,—the

’ expression, 9on Dieu? This, under the circumstances, has
been justly characterized by one of the witnesses (Montani,
the confectioner,) as an expression of remonstrance or expos-
tulation. Upon these two words, therefore, I have mainly
built my hopes of a full solution of the riddle. A Frenchman
was cognizant of the murder. It is possible—indeed it is far
more than probable—that he was innocent of all partici-

pation in the bloody transactions which took place. The

' THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 425

Ourang-Outang may have escaped from him. He may have
traced it to the chamber; but, under the agitating circum-
stances which ensued, he could never have re-captured it. It

- is still at large. I will not pursue these guesses—for I have no

right to call them more—since the shades of reflection upon
which they are based are scarcely of sufficient depth to be
appreciable by my own intellect, and since I could not pre-
tend to make them intelligible to the understanding of an-
other. We will call them guesses then, and speak of them as
such. If the Frenchman in question is indeed, as I suppose,
innocent of this atrocity, this advertisement, which I left last
night, upon our return home, at the office of ‘Le Monde,’ (a
paper devoted to the shipping interest, and much sought by
sailors,) will bring him to our residence.”
He handed me a paper, and I read thus:

Caueut— In the Bois de Boulogne, early in the morning of
the —— inst., (the morning of the murder,) a very large,
tawny Ourang-Outang of the Bornese species. The owner, (who is
ascertained to be a sailor, belonging to a Maltese vessel,) may have
the animal again, upon identifying it satisfactorily, and paying a
few charges arising from its capture and keeping. Call at No. —.,
Rue » Faubourg St. Germain— au troisieme.

“How was it possible,” I asked, “that you should know the
man to be a sailor, and belonging to a Maltese vessel?”

“T do not know it,” said Dupin. “I am not sure of it. Here,
however, is a small piece of ribbon, which from its form, and
from its greasy appearance, has evidently been used in tying
the hair in one of those long guewes of which sailors are so
fond. Moreover, this knot is one which few besides sailors can
tie, and is peculiar to the Maltese. I picked the ribbon up at
the foot of the lightning-rod. It could not have belonged to
either of the deceased. Now if, after all, I am wrong in my
induction from this ribbon, that the Frenchman was a sailor
belonging to a Maltese vessel, still I can have done no harm
in saying what I did in the advertisement. If I am in error, he
will merely suppose that I have been misled by some circum-
stance into which he will not take the trouble to inquire. But
if I am right, a great point is gained. Cognizant although



--- Page 16 ---
426 TALES AND SKETCHES

innocent of the murder, the Frenchman will naturally hesitate
about replying to the advertisement—about demanding the
Ourang-Outang. He will reason thus: —‘I am innocent; I am
poor; my Ourang-Outang is of great value—to one in my
circumstances a fortune of itself—why should I lose it
through idle apprehensions of danger? Here it is, within my
grasp. It was found in the Bois de Boulogne—at a vast dis-
tance from the scene of that butchery. How can it ever be
suspected that a brute beast should have done the deed? The
police are at fault—they have failed to procure the slightest
clew. Should they even trace the animal, it would be impos-
sible to prove me cognizant of the murder, or to implicate me
in guilt on account of that cognizance. Above all, I am known.
The advertiser designates me as the possessor of the beast. I
am not sure to what limit his knowledge may extend. Should
T avoid claiming a property of so great value, which it is
known that I possess, I will render the animal at least, liable
to suspicion. It is not my policy to attract attention either to
myself or to the beast. I will answer the advertisement, get
the Ourang-Outang, and keep it close until this matter has
blown over.’ ” :

At this moment we heard a step upon the stairs.

“Be ready,” said Dupin, “ with your pistols, but neither use
them nor show them until at a signal from myself.”

The front door of the house had been left open, and the
visiter had entered, without ringing, and advanced several
steps upon the staircase. Now, however, he seemed to hesi-
tate. Presently we heard him descending. Dupin was moving
quickly to the door, when we again heard him coming wp.
He did not tur back a second time, but stepped up with
decision, and rapped at the door of our chamber.

“Come in,” said Dupin, in a cheerful and hearty tone.

A man entered. He was a sailor, evidently,—a tall, stout,
and muscular-looking person, with a certain dare-devil expres-
sion of countenance, not altogether unprepossessing. His
face, greatly sun-burnt, was more than half hidden by whisker
and mustachio. He had with him a huge oaken cudgel, but
appeared to be otherwise unarmed. He bowed awkwardly,
and bade us “good evening,” in French accents, which, al-

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 427

though somewhat Neufchatel-ish, were still sufficiently indic-
ative of a Parisian origin.

“Sit down, my friend,” said Dupin. “I suppose you have
called about the Ourang-Outang. Upon my word, I almost
envy you the possession of him; a remarkably fine, and no
doubt a very valuable animal. How old do you suppose him
to be?” ,

The sailor drew a long breath, with the air of a man re-
lieved of some intolerable burden, and then replied, in an as-
sured tone:

“T have no way of telling—but he can’t be more than four
or five years old. Have you got him here?”

“Oh no; we had no conveniences for keeping him here. He
is at a livery stable in the Rue Dubourg, just by. You can get
him in the morning. Of course you are prepared to identify
the property?”

“To be sure I am, sir.”

“T shall be sorry to part with him,” said Dupin.

“I don’t mean that you should be at all this trouble for
nothing, sir,” said the man. “Couldn’t expect it. Am very will-
ing to pay a reward for the finding of the animal—that is to
say, any thing in reason.”

“Well,” replied my friend, “that is all very fair, to be sure,
Let me think!—what should I have? Oh! T will tell you. My
reward shall be this. You shall give me all the information in
your power about these murders in the Rue Morgue.”

Dupin said the last words in a very low tone, and very.
quietly. Just as quietly, too, he walked toward the door,
locked it, and put the key in his pocket. He then drew a pistol
from his bosom and placed it, without the least flurry, upon
the table. .

The sailor’s face flushed up as if he were struggling with
suffocation. He started to his feet and grasped his cudgel; but
the next moment he fell back into his seat, trembling vio-
lently, and with the countenance of death itself He spoke not
a word. I pitied him from the bottom of my heart.

“My friend,” said Dupin, in a kind tone, “you are alarming
yourself unnecessarily—you are indeed. We mean you no
harm whatever. I pledge you the honor of a gentleman, and



--- Page 17 ---
428 TALES AND SKETCHES

of a Frenchman, that we intend you no injury. I perfectly well
know that you are innocent of the atrocities in the Rue
Morgue. It will not do, however, to deny that you are in
some measure implicated in them. From what I have already
said, you must know that I have had means of information
about this matter—means of which you could never have
dreamed. Now the thing stands thus. You have done nothing
which you could have
tenders you culpable. You were not even guilty of
when you might have robbed with impunity. You have noe
ing to conceal, You have no reason for concealment. On the
other hand, you are bound by every principle of honor to
confess, all you know. An innocent man is now imprisoned.
arged wi at crime of whi 34 :
poor hich you can point out the per-
The sailor had recovered his presence of mind, in a
measure, while Dupin uttered ; his original
boldness of bearing was all gone. ms words ut his original
“So help me God,” said he, after a brief pause, “I will
you all I know about this affair;—but I do hot expect you to
believe one half I say—I would be a fool indeed if I did. Still.
I am innocent, and I will make a clean breast if I die for it

What he stated was, in substance, this. He had lately made
a voyage to the Indian Archipelago, A party, of which he
formed one, Janded at Borneo, and passed into the interior
on an excursion of pleasure. Himself and a companion had
captured the Ourang-Outang. This companion dying, the an-
imal fell into his own exclusive possession. After great trou-
ble, occasioned by the intractable ferocity of his captive
during the home voyage, he at length succeeded in lodging it
safely at his own residence in Paris, where, not to attract to-
ward himself the unpleasant curiosity of his neighbors he
kept it carefully secluded, until such time as it should recover
from a wound in the foot, received from a splinter on board
ship. His ultimate design was to sell it.

Returning home from some sailors’ frolic on the night, or
rather in the morning of the murder, he found the beast ‘oc:
cupying his own bed-room, into which it had broken from a
closet adjoining, Where it had been, as was thought, securely
confined. Razor in hand, and fully lathered, it was sitting be-

avoided—nothing, certainly, which -

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE 429

fore a looking-glass, attempting the operation of shaving, in
which it had no doubt previously watched its master through
the key-hole of the closet. Terrified at the sight of so danger-
ous a weapon in the possession of an animal so ferocious, and
so well able to use it, the man, for some moments, was at a
loss what to-do. He had been accustomed, however, to quiet
the creature, even in its fiercest moods, by the use of a whip,
and to this he now resorted. Upon sight of it, the Ourang-
Outang sprang at once through the door of the chamber,
down the stairs, and thence, through a window, unfortu-
nately open, into the street. :

The Frenchman followed in despair, the ape, razor still in
hand, occasionally stopping to look back and gesticulate at its
pursuer, until the latter had nearly come up with it. It then
again made off. In this manner the chase continued for a long
time. The streets were profoundly quiet, as it was nearly three
o’clock in the morning. In passing down an alley in the rear
of the Rue Morgue, the fugitive’s attention was arrested by a
light gleaming from the open window of Madame L’Espa-
naye’s chamber, in the fourth story of her house. Rushing to
the building, it perceived the lightning-rod, clambered up
with inconceivable agility, grasped the shutter, which was
thrown fully back against the wall, and, by its means, swung
itself directly upon the headboard of the bed. The whole feat
did not occupy a minute. The shutter was kicked open again
by the Ourang-Outang as it entered the room.

The sailor, in the meantime,.was both rejoiced and. per-
plexed. He had strong hopes of now recapturing the brute,
as it could scarcely escape from the trap into which it had
ventured, except by the rod, where it might be intercepted as
it came down. On the other hand, there was much cause for
anxiety as to what it might do in the house. This latter reflec-
tion urged the man still to follow the fugitive. A lightning-
rod is ascended without difficulty, especially by a sailor; but,
when he had arrived as high as the window, which lay far to
his left, his career was stopped; the most that he could accom--
plish was to reach over so as to obtain a glimpse of the inte-
rior of the room. At this glimpse he nearly fell from his hold
through excess of horror. Now it was that those hideous
shrieks arose upon the night, which had startled from slumber



--- Page 18 ---
430 TALES AND SKETCHES

the inmates of the Rue Morgue. Madame L’Espanaye and her
daughter, habited in their night clothes, had apparently been
occupied in arranging some papers in the iron chest already
mentioned, which had been wheeled into the middle of the
room. It was open, and its contents lay beside it on the floor.
The victims must have been sitting with their backs toward
the window; and, from the time elapsing between the ingress
of the beast and the screams, it seems probable that it was not
immediately perceived. The flapping-to of the shutter would
naturally have been attributed to the wind.

As the sailor looked in, the gigantic animal had seized Ma-
dame L’Espanaye by the hair, (which was loose, as she had
been combing it,) and was flourishing the razor about her
face, in imitation of the motions of a barber. The daughter
lay prostrate and motionless; she had swooned. The screams
and struggles of the old lady (during which the hair was torn
from her head) had the effect of changing the probably pacific
purposes of the Ourang-Outang into those of wrath. With
one determined sweep of its muscular arm it nearly severed
her head from her body. The sight of blood inflamed its anger
into phrenzy. Gnashing its teeth, and flashing fire from its
eyes, it lew upon the body of the girl, and imbedded its fear-
ful talons in her throat, retaining its grasp until she expired.
Its wandering and wild glances fell at this moment upon the
head of the bed, over which the face of its master, rigid with
horror, was just discernible. The fury of the beast, who no
doubt bore still in mind the dreaded whip, was instantly con-
verted into fear. Conscious of having deserved punishment, it
seemed desirous of concealing its bloody deeds, and skipped
about the chamber in an agony of nervous agitation; throw-
ing down and breaking the furniture as it moved, and drag-
ging the bed from the bedstead. In conclusion, it seized first
the corpse of the daughter, and thrust it up the chimney, as
it was found; then that of the old lady, which it immediately
hurled through the window headlong.

As the ape approached the casement with its mutilated bur-
den, the sailor shrank aghast to the rod, and, rather gliding
than clambering down it, hurried at once home—dreading
the consequences of the butchery, and gladly abandoning, in
his terror, all solicitude about the fate of the Ourang-Outang.

431

The words heard by the party upon the staircase were the
Frenchman’s exclamations of horror and affright, commingled
with the fiendish jabberings of the brute. °

I have scarcely anything to add. The Ourang-Outang must
have escaped from the chamber, by the rod, just before the
breaking of the door. It must have closed the window as it
passed through it. It was subsequently caught by the owner
himself, who obtained for it a very large sum at the Jardin des
Plantes. Le Bon was instantly released, upon our narration of
the circumstances (with some comments from Dupin) at the
bureau of the Prefect of Police. This functionary, however
well disposed to my friend, could not altogether conceal his
chagrin at the turn which affairs had taken, and was fain to
indulge in a sarcasm or two, about the propri 7
son minding his own business, Propriny of every Ber

“Let him talk,” said Dupin, who had not thought it neces-
sary to reply. “Let him discourse; it will ease his conscience.
I am satisfied with having defeated him in his own castle.
Nevertheless, that he failed in the solution of this mystery. is
by no means that matter for wonder which he supposes ‘it;
for, in truth, our friend the Prefect is somewhat too cunnin ;
to be profound. In his wisdom is no stamen. It is all head and
no body, like the pictures of the Goddess Laverna,—or, at

THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE

_ best, all head and shoulders, like a codfish. But he is a good

creature after all. I like him especially for one master stroke of
cant, by which he has attained his reputation for ingenuity. I
me Ch, os 1 : :
me wp ane way he has de nier ce qui est, et Pexpliquer ce qui

*Rousseau—Nouvelle Heloise.



