--- Page 1 ---
EpGar ALLAN POE

POETRY, TALES, AND
SELECTED ESSAYS

EDITIONS

-THE LIBRARY OF AMERICA



--- Page 2 ---
Volume arrangement, notes, and chronology copyright © 1984, 1996 by
Literary Classics of the United States, Inc., New York, N.Y.
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced commercially
by offset-lithographic or equivalent copying devices without
: the permission of the publisher.

Texts from Collected Works of Edgar Allan Poe are
copyright © 1969 and 1978 by The President and Fellows
of Harvard College. All rights reserved. .
Texts from The Poems of Edgar Allan Poe are copyright © 1965
by the Rector & Visitors of the University of Virginia.
All rights reserved.
The text of Eureka: A Prose Poem is copyright © 1975
by Roland W. Nelson, All rights reserved.

Distributed in the United States
by Penguin Books USA Inc
and in Canada by Penguin Books Canada Ltd.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 96-8922
For cataloging information, see end of Notes.
ISBN 1-883011—38-8

Originally published in hardcover, in a slightly different form,
by The Library of America in 1984.

First Library of America College Edition
September 1996

Manufactured in the United States of America

Patrick F. QuINN
WROTE THE NOTES FOR THE
POETRY AND TALES

G.R. THompPson
WROTE THE NOTES FOR THE ESSAYS



--- Page 3 ---
832, TALES AND SKETCHES

The Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar

Having related all that was necessary for the fullest: jud
conviction, I fell prostrate in a swoon.

But why shall I say more? To-day I wear these chains;
am here! To-morrow I shall be fettérless!— but where?

() F CouRSE I shall not pretend to consider it any matter
for wonder, that the extraordinary case of M. Valdemar
excited discussion. It would have been a miracle had it
especially under the circumstances. Through the desire
parties concerned, to keep the affair from the public, at
t-for the present, or until we had farther opportunities for
stigation—through our endeavors to effect. this—a gar-
or exaggerated account made its way into society, and
¢ the source of many unpleasant misrepresentations,
very naturally, of a great deal of disbelief.
fis now rendered necessary that I give the facts—as far as
mprehend them myself. They are, succinctly, these:
ly attention, for the last three years, had been repeatedly
to the subject of Mesmerism; and, about nine months
it occurred to me, quite suddenly, that in the series of
periments made hitherto, there had been a very remarkable
most unaccountable omission:—no person had as yet
mesmerized in articulo mortis. It remained to be seen,
‘whether, in such condition, there existed in the patient
susceptibility to the magnetic influence; secondly,
ther, if any existed, it was impaired or increased by the
tion; thirdly, to what extent, or for how long a period,
encroachments of Death might be arrested by the process,
re were other points to be ascertained, but these most
ed my curiosity—the last in especial, from the immensely
important character of its consequences.

looking around me for some subject by whose means I
ht test these particulars, I was brought to think of my
nd, M. Ernest Valdemar, the well-known compiler of the
ibliotheca Forensica,” and author (under the nom de plume
achar Marx) of the Polish versions of “Wallenstein” and
gantua.” M. Valdemar, who has resided principally at
larlaem, N. Y., since the year 1839, is (or was) particularly
ceable for the extreme spareness of his person—his lower

much resembling those of John Randolph; and, also,
forthe whiteness of his whiskers, in violent contrast to the
blackness of his hair—the latter, in consequence, being very

833 :



--- Page 4 ---
834. TALES AND SKETCHES

THE CASE OF M. VALDEMAR 835

generally mistaken for a wig. His temperament was m
nervous, and rendered him a good subject for mesme!
periment. On two or three occasions I had put him to
with little difficulty, but was disappointed in other:
which his peculiar constitution had naturally led me td.an
ipate. His will was at no period positively, or thoro, i
under my control, and in regard to clairvoyance, I coul
complish with him nothing to be relied upon. I always
uted my failure at these points to the disordered state
health. For some months previous to my becomiri
quainted with him, his physicians had declared him in:
firmed phthisis. It was his custom, indeed, to speak calm
his approaching dissolution, as of a matter neithe
avoided nor regretted.

When the ideas to which I have alluded first occur
me, it was of course very natural that I should think ©
Valdemar. I knew the steady philosophy of the man to
to apprehend any scruples from im; and he had no re
in America who would be likely to interfere. I spoke t
frankly upon the subject; and, to my surprise, his int
seemed vividly excited. I say to my surprise; for, althoug!
had always yielded his person freely to my experiment
had never before given me any tokens of sympathy with
I did. His disease was of that character which would a
exact calculation in respect to the epoch of its terminatio
death; and it was finally arranged between us that he w
send for me about twenty-four hours before the perio
nounced by bis E physicians as that of his decease.

1s now rather more than seven months si
from M. Valdemar himself, the subjoined note: nee

9

My Dear P >

You may as well come xow. D—— and F—:
agreed that I cannot hold out beyond to-morrow
night; and I think they have hit the time very nearly..:

ayself, Doctors D—— and F -
farewell. It had not been their intention to return; but,
my: request, they agreed to look in upon the patient about

alteration which the brief interval had wrought in him.

ce wore a leaden hue; the eyes were utterly lustreless;

 emaciation was so extreme that the skin had been
through by the cheek-bones. His expectoration was

cessive. The pulse was barely perceptible. He retained, nev-
less, in a very remarkable manner, both his mental power
certain degree of physical strength. He spoke with dis-
ess —took some palliative medicines without aid—and,
I entered the room, was occupied in penciling memo-

a pocket-book. He was propped up in the bed by

ws. Doctors D-— and F—— were in attendance.
ex pressing Valdemar’s hand, I took these gentlemen

and obtained from them a minute account of the pa-

°s condition. The left lung had been for eighteen months
“semi-osseous or cartilaginous state, and was, of course,
ly useless for all purposes of vitality. The right, in its

portion, was also partially, if not thoroughly, ossified,

the lower region was merely a mass of purulent tuber-
running one into another. Several extensive perforations
d; and, at one point, permanent adhesion to the ribs had
place. These appearances in the right lobe were of com-
vely recent date. The ossification had proceeded with
unusual rapidity; no sign of it had been discovered a

before, and the adhesion had only been observed dur-

1 three previous days. Independently of the phthisis, the -
tt was suspected of ancurism of the aorta; but on this

the osseous symptoms rendered an exact diagnosis im-

ible. It was the opinion of both physicians that M. Val-

would. die about midnight on the morrow (Sunday).
then seven o’clock on Saturday evening.

quitting the invalid’s bed-side to hold conversation —
had bidden him a

e next night.

When they had gone, I spoke freely with M. Valdemar on

bject of his approaching dissolution, as well as, more
arly, of the experiment proposed. He still professed
quite willing and even anxious to have it made, and
me to commence it at once. A male and a female nurse



--- Page 5 ---
836 TALES AND SKETCHES

THE CASE OF M, VALDEMAR 837

were in attendance: but I did not feel m
: C5 self altogeth
vberty to engage in a task of this character with
re able witnesses than these people, in case of sudden
ent, might prove. I therefore postponed operatio
al out eight the next night, when the arrival of a medi
gent with whom I had some acquaintance, (Mr. Theo
t me, (Sieved me from farther embarrassmen
| my design, originally, t i ici
was induced to proceed firs * by the urgent ean
Valdemar, and second} : ict
3 ly, by my conviction th
moment to lose, as he was evidently sinking fast. the
Mr. L—-l was so kind as to acc i

the stertorous breathing ceased—that is to say, its ster-
rousness was no longer apparent; the intervals were undi-
shed. The patient’s extremities were of an icy coldness.
ive minutes before eleven I perceived unequivocal signs
© mesmeric influence. The glassy roll of the eye was
ged for that expression of uneasy inward examination
hich is never seen except in cases of sleep-waking, and
hi it is quite impossible to mistake. With a few rapid lat-
asses I made the lids quiver, as in incipient sleep, and
‘with'a few more I closed them altogether. I was not satisfied,
oo ever, with this, but continued the manipulations vigor-
ede to my desire tha y, and with the fullest exertion of the vil, until Thad
: pletely stiffened the limbs of the slumberer, after placing
either condensed or copied verbatim, em in a seemingly easy position. The legs were at full
_it wanted about five minutes of eight when, takin, ngth; the arms were nearly so, and reposed on the bed at a
tent’s hand, I begged him to state, as distinctly as E, 5 d erate distance from the loins. The head was very slightly
: ated.
When I had accomplished this, it was fully midnight, and I
quested the gentlemen present to examine M. Valdemar’s
ition. After a few experiments, they admitted him to be
an unusually perfect state of mesmeric trance. The curiosity
both the physicians was greatly excited. Dr. D—— re-
éd at once to remain with the patient all night, while Dr.
= — took leave with a promise to return at day-break. Mr.
1 and the nurses remained.
We left M. Valdemar entirely undisturbed until about three
lock in the morning, when I approached him and found
in precisely the same condition as when Dr. F—— went
way—that is to say, he lay in the same position; the pulse
s imperceptible; the breathing was gentle (scarcely notice-
unless through the application of a mirror to the lips);
yes were closed naturally; and the limbs were as rigid
as cold as marble. Still, the general appearance was cer-
ly not that of death. .
‘As I approached M. Valdemar I made a kind of half effort
uence his right arm into pursuit of my own, as I passed.
ater gently to and fro above his person. In such experi-
ents with this patient I had never perfectly succeeded. be-
and assuredly I had little thought of succeeding now;
to my astonishment, his arm very readily, although feebly,

his then condition,

He replied feebly, yet qui i « i
ve Tep ebly, yet quite audibly, “Yes, I
merized —adding immediately aftervvards 1 fers :
deferred it too long.” > yo

ter ten o’clock, when Doctors D
cording to appointment. I explained to
what designed, and as they
at the patient was already in the death a
: ient ony, I
Paeet Pesitation—exchanging, however, the lateral
c ward ones, and directi ’ i int
eat ore ohh directing my gaze entirely into
'y this time his pulse was imperceptib: i
was stertorous, and at intervals of half a rains nus bee
howe a condition was nearly unaltered for a quarter:
re { the expiration of this period, however, a natuital
ough a very deep sigh escaped the bosom of the dying

and F——. call
them, in a few wor
opposed no objection, sa



--- Page 6 ---
838 TALES AND SKETCHES THE CASE OF M. VALDEMAR 839

followed every direction I assigned it with mine. I deteriititi
to hazard a few words of conversation. ,

“M. Valdemar,” I said, “are you asleep?” He made
swer, but I perceived a tremor about the lips, and wa
induced to repeat the question, again and again. At its;t
tepetition, his whole frame was agitated by a very sligh:
ering; the eye-lids unclosed themselves so far as to displ:
white line of the ball; the lips moved sluggishly, and
between them, in a barely audible whisper, issued the words

“Yes;—asleep now. Do not wake mée!—let me die so!

_There felt the limbs and found them as rigid as ever.
right arm, as before, obeyed the direction of my hand. I que
tioned the sleep-waker again:

“Do you still feel pain in the breast, M. Valdemar?”

b oe answer now was immediate, but even less audible
efore:

“No pain—I am dying.”

I did not think it advisable to disturb him farther just :
and nothing more was said or done until the arrival of
F—.,, who came a little before sunrise, and expressed.
bounded astonishment at finding the patient still alive.
feeling the pulse and applying a mirror to the lip
Tequested me to speak to the sleep-waker again. I did
saying:

“M. Valdemar, do you still sleep?”

sumed a cadaverous hue, resembling not so much parchment
hite paper; and the circular hectic spots which, hitherto,
d been strongly defined in the centre of each cheek, went
# at once. I use this expression, because the suddenness of
it departure put me in mind of nothing so much as the
xtinguishment of a candle by a puff of the breath. The upper
at the same time, writhed itself away from the teeth,
hich it had previously covered completely; while the lower
fell with an audible jerk, leaving the mouth widely ex-
nded, and disclosing in full view the swollen and blackened
ngue. I presume that no member of the party then present
been unaccustomed to death-bed horrors; but so hideous
eyond conception was the appearance of M. Valdemar at this
joment, that there was a general shrinking back from the
ion of the bed.
now feel that I have reached a point of this narrative at
ch every reader will be startled into positive disbelief. It is
business, however, simply to proceed.
here was no longer the faintest sign of vitality in M. Val-
ar; and concluding him to be dead, we were consigning
to the charge of the nurses, when a strong vibratory mo-
n was observable in the tongue. This continued for perhaps
minute. At the expiration of this period, there issued from
distended and motionless jaws a voice—such as it would
madness in me to attempt describing. There are, indeed,’
during the interval the dvi He; or three epithets which might be considered as applicable
ene 8 ak A dying man seemed to be collecting it in part; I might say, for example, that the sound was
lergies to speak. At my fourth repetition of the question arsh, and broken and hollow; but the hideous whole is in-
said very faintly, almost inaudibly:
“Yes; stili asleep—dying.”

_ It was now the opinion, or rather the wish, of the ph:
cians, that M. Valdemar should be suffered to remain un
turbed in his. present apparently tranquil condition, .
death should supervene—and this, it was generally ag:
must now take place within a few minutes. I concluded,
ever, to speak to him once more, and merely repeate
Previous question.

While I spoke, there came a marked change over the
tenance of the sleep-waker. The eyes rolled themselves slow!
open, the pupils disappearing upwardly; the skin generalh W

lars, nevertheless, which I thought then, and still think,
ight fairly be stated as characteristic of the intonation—as
li adapted to convey some idea of its unearthly peculiarity.
An-the first place, the voice seemed to reach our ears—at least
mine——from a vast distance, or from some deep cavern within
earth. In the second place, it impressed me (I fear, indeed,
t it will be impossible to make myself comprehended) as
atinous or glutinous matters impress the sense of touch.

have spoken both of “sound” and of “voice.” I mean to
that the sound was one of distinct—of even wonderfully,



--- Page 7 ---
Z AR
840 TALES AND SKETCHES THE CASE OF M. VALDEM

Valdemar would be merely to insure his instant, or at least
speedy dissolution. ;

From this period until the close of last week— an interval
of'nearly seven months—we continued to make daily calls at
Valdemar’s house, accompanied, now and then, by medi-
and other friends. All this time the sleep-waker remained
exactly as I have last described him. The nurses’ attentions
e continual.

twas on Friday last that we finally resolved to make the
riment of awakening, or attempting to awaken him; and
the (perhaps) unfortunate result of this latter experiment
hich has given rise to so much discussion in private cir-
les—to so much of what I cannot help thinking unwar-
ranted popular feeling. .

‘or the purpose of relieving M. Valdemar from the mes-
eric trance, I made use of the customary passes. These, for
time, were unsuccessful. The first indication of revival was
‘orded by a partial descent of the iris. It was observed, as
pecially remarkable, that this lowering of the pupil was ac-
should mention, too, that this limb was no farther subjec ‘ompanied by the profuse out:flowing of a yellowish ichor

thrillingly distinct—syllabification. M. Valdemar Spoke
viously in reply to the question I had propounded to A
few minutes before. I had asked him, it will-be rememb:
if he still slept. He now said:

“Yes;—no;—I have been sleeping—and now—now.
am dead.”

No person present even affected to deny, or attempte
repress, the unutterable, shuddering horror which these:
words, thus uttered, were so well calculated to convey.
L I (the student) swooned. The nurses immediately
the chamber, and could not be induced to return. My oy
impressions I would not pretend to render intelligible to
reader. For nearly an hour, we busied ourselves, silenth
without the utterance of a word—in endeavors to revive.
L-—l. When he came to himself, we addressed ours
again to an investigation of M. Valdemar’s condition.

It remained in all respects as I have last described it, with
the exception that the mirror no longer afforded evidenc

of my hand. The only real indication, indeed, of the mesm
influence, was now found in the vibratory movement of:
tongue, whenever I addressed M. Valdemar a question.
seemed to be making an effort at reply, but had no longi
sufficient volition. To queries put to him by any other per
than myself he seemed utterly insensible—although I end
ored to place each member of the company in mesmeric

port with him. I believe that I have now related all tha

it now was suggested that I should attempt to influence
@ patient’s arm, as heretofore. I made the attempt and

‘There was an instant return of the hectic circles on the
ecks; the tongue quivered, or rather roled viovently n oat
i ; ough the jaws and lips remained rigid as before;
left he ho se in company wih dae eas tnd atten elo at tenet the same hideous. voice which r have already

lescribed, broke forth:

For God’s sake! —quick! —quick! —put me to sleep—or,
fuick!—waken me!—quick!—T say to you that I am dead! ”

‘1 was thoroughly unnerved, and for an instant remained
indecided what to do. At first I made an endeavor to re-
‘ompose the patient; but, failing in this through total abey-
ce of the will, I retraced my steps and as earnestly struggled
the mesmeric process, It seemed clear to us all that to awak awaken him. In this attempt I soon saw that I should be

In the afternoon we all called again to see the patient.
condition remained precisely the same. We had now some ‘
cussion as to the propriety and feasibility of awakening
but we had little difficulty in agreeing that no good. purp
would be served by so doing. It was evident that, so :



--- Page 8 ---
84.2. TALES AND SKETCHES

successful—or at least I soon fancied that my success wi
be complete—and I am sure that all in the room were.
pared to see the patient awaken.

For what really occurred, however, it is quite impos
that any human being could have been prepared. :

As I rapidly made the mesmeric passes, amid ejacula
of “dead! dead!” absolutely bursting from the tongue an
from the lips of the sufferer, his whole frame at once—wii
the space of a single minute, or even less, shrunk—.
bled—absolutely rotted away beneath my hands. Upo
bed, before that whole company, there lay a nearly liq
mass of loathsome—of detestable putridity.

‘The Sphinx

) uRING the dread reign of the Cholera in New-York, I
had accepted the invitation of a relative to spend a fort-
ght with him in the retirement of his cottage ornée on the
banks of the Hudson. We had here around us all the ordinary
leans of summer amusement; and what with rambling in the
ods, sketching, boating, fishing, bathing, music and books,
should have passed the time pleasantly enough, but for
the fearful intelligence which reached us every morning from
¢ populous city. Not a day elapsed which did not bring us
s of the decease of some acquaintance. Then, as the fatal-
ity increased, we learned to expect daily the loss of some
end. At length we trembled at the approach of every mes-
nger. The very air from the South seemed to us redolent
ith death. That palsying thought, indeed, took entire pos-
ssion of my soul. I could neither speak, think, nor dream of
ything else. My host was of a less excitable temperament,
d, although greatly depressed in spirits, exerted himself to
stain my own. His richly philosophical intellect was not at
y time affected by unrealities. To the substances of terror
-was sufficiently alive, but of its shadows he had no appre-
nsion. -
His endeavors to arouse me from the condition of abnor-
gloom into which I had fallen, were frustrated in great
easure, by certain volumes which I had found in his library.
ese were of a character to force into germination whatever
ds of hereditary superstition lay latent in my bosom. I had
been reading these books without his knowledge, and thus he
‘as often at a loss to account for the forcible impressions
hich had been made upon my fancy.

favorite topic with me was the popular belief in omens—
belief which, at this one epoch of my life, I was almost se-
ously disposed to defend. On this subject we had long and
limated discussions—he maintaining the utter groundlessness
‘faith in such matters—I contending that a popular senti-
t arising with absolute spontaneity—that is to say, with-
apparent traces of suggestion —had in itself the unmistake-

843



