--- Page 1 ---
GUY DE MAUPASSANT

, SELECTED
SHORT STORIES

TRANSLATED
t : WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
y _ ROGER COLET

PENGUIN BOOKS



--- Page 2 ---
MANITOWOC

jooks-Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England
‘0. Ambassador Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21207, U.S.A.

¥

ks Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia . Cc O N T E N T 8

“INTRODUCTION

: 7
tight © Roger Colet, ro7z TRANSLATOR’S NOTE 17

a - I
Made and printed in Great Britain by BOULE DE SUIF a
Richard Clay (The Chaucer Press) Ltd IN THE SPRING 9

Bungay, Suffolk .

Set in Linotype Granjon THE GRAVEYARD SISTERHOOD TT
. MADAME TELLIER’S ESTABLISHMENT 87
: A RUSE 123
AN OLD MAN 130
RUST 137
TWO FRIENDS 147
THE JEWELS “157
THE CONSERVATORY 167
THE MATTER WITH ANDRE 175
MY UNCLE JULES — 183
A DUEL 193
THE CONVERT ~ 199
IN THE BEDROOM 209
REGRET 217
THE DECORATION 225

2
This book is sold subject to the condition THE PIECE OF STRING a

that it shall not, b: f trad ise,
be leat, re-sold, hired oul, or Che EES, THE MODEL
without the publisher's prior consent in any form of THE HAND ajt
binding or cover other than that in which it is
published and without a similar condition IDYLL 259
including this condition being imposed

on the subsequent purchaser

MOTHER SAVAGE

265



--- Page 3 ---
Tc SO Pg

THE HORLA

8 May. What a glorious day! I spent the whole morning
stretched out ih the grass in front of my house, under the
huge plane tree which covers it completely, giving it shelter
and shade.

I love this part of the country and I love living here be-
cause it is here that I have my roots, those deep and
delicate roots which bind a man to the soil where his fore-
fathers were born and died, bind him to ways of thinking
and eating, to local customs, dishes, turns of phrase, to the
intonations of the peasants’ voices, to the smells of the
villages, of the earth, of the very air.

I love this house of mine where I grew up. From my
windows I can see the Seine flowing alongside my garden,
beyond the main road, almost through my house, the
great, wide Seine which goes from Rouen to Le Havre, .
covered with passing boats.

Over to the left is Rouen, a vast city of blue roofs lying
beneath a bristling host of Gothic belfries. They are beyond
number, these belfries, slender or sturdy, dominated by

_ the cathedral’s iron steeple, and filled with bells which

ring out in the limpid air of fine mornings, sending me
the sweet, distant hum of their iron tongues, a brazen song
borne to me by the breeze, louder or fainter as it swells or
dies away. ‘

How delightful everything was this morning!

About eleven o’clock a long line of boats passed my
gate, drawn by a pint-sized tug which panted with the
effort and vomited thick clouds of smoke.

After a couple of English schooners, their red flags

313



--- Page 4 ---
THE HORLA

fluttering against the sky, came a splendid. Brazilian three-
master, all white and gleamirig and spotlessly clean. The
sight of this boat gave me such pleasure that for some
unknown reason I saluted her.

12 May. I have had a touch of fever for the last few days;
I feel unwell, or rather I feel sad.

Where do they come from, these mysterious influences
which turn our happiness into gloom and our self-assurance
into distress? It is as if the air, the invisible air, were full of
unfathomable powers, whose mysterious proximity affects
us. I wake up full of high spirits, with a longing to sing
bubbling up in my throat. Why? I go for a stroll by the
river, and after walking a little way, I suddenly turn back
feeling miserable, as if some misfortune were waiting for
me at home. Why? Has some cold shiver, passing over my

skin, shaken my nerves and saddened my soul? Has the -

shape of the clouds or the colour of the day, that ever-chang-

ing colour of things, troubled my thoughts as it passed.

through my eyes? Who can tell? Everything about us,
everything we see without looking at it, everything we
brush past without knowing it, everything we touch with-
out feeling it, everything we meet without noticing it, has
swift, surprising and inexplicable effects on us, on our
senses, and through them on our ideas, on our very hearts.
How profound it is, that mystery of the Invisible; We
cannot fathom it with our wretched senses; with our eyes
which can perceive neither what is too small nor what is
too big, neither what is too close nor what is too distant,
neither the inhabitants of a star nor the inhabitants of a
drop of water....Or with our ears which. deceive us by
transmitting the vibrations of the air to us as. sonorous
notes, for they are fairies which work the miracle of chang-

ing that movement into sound, and through that meta-

314

Oye

i
{

THE HORLA

morphosis give birth to music, which turns the mute
agitation of Nature into song....Or with our sense of
smell, which is feebler than that of any dog.... Or with
our taste, which can barely detect the age of a wine.

Oh, if only we had other senses which could work other

‘miracles on our behalf, how many more things we could

discover around us!

16 May. I am ill: that’s certain! I have a fever, an atro-
cious fever, or rather a feverish weakness which afflicts my
mind just as much as my body. All the time I have this
terrible feeling of imminent danger, this apprehension of
impending misfortune or approaching death, this Presenti- -
ment which is doubtless the first sign of some disease, as
yet unknown, germinating in my blood and my: flesh.

18 May. 1 have just been to see my doctor for T could not
sleep any more. He found that my pulse was rapid, my
pupils dilated, and my nerves on edge, but that I had no
symptoms of an alarming nature, I have to take showers
and drink bromide of potassium.

25 May. No change. My condition is really very strange.
As evening draws on an incomprehensible uneasiness comes
over me, as if the darkness held some dreadful threat for
me. I dine hurriedly, then try to-read; but I cannot under-
stand the words; I can scarcely make out the letters. So then
I pace up and down my drawing-room in the grip of a
vague and irresistible fear, fear of sleep and fear-of my bed.

About two o’clock I go up to my room. I am no sooner
inside than I double-lock the door and shoot the bolts. I
am afraid... but of what?...I was never afraid of any-
thing before. ...I open my wardrobes, I look’ under my
bed, and I listen...:T listen to what?...Isn’t it strange

315



--- Page 5 ---
THE HORLA

that a slight indisposition, a disorder of the circulation

perhaps, an irritation of the nerves, a little congestion, a .

small disturbance in the delicate, imperfect functioning of
the human machine, can make a melancholic of the hap-
piest of men and a coward of the bravest? Then I go to
bed and wait for sleep as if 1 were waiting for the execu-
tioner. I wait for it in terror of its coming, with my heart

pounding and my legs trembling. My whole body shivers.

in the warmth of the bedclothes, till the moment when I
suddenly fall asleep like a man falling into a chasm full
of stagnant water to drown. Nowadays I no longer feel the
approach of this perfidious sleep, lurking near me, watch-
ing me, waiting to seize me by the head, close my eyes,
annihilate me. .

I sleep for a long time — two or three hours; then a
dream — no, a nightmare — takes hold of me. I am fully
aware that I am in bed and asleep... I feel it and know it
...and I also feel somebody approach me, look at me,
touch me, climb on to my bed, touch me, kneel on my
chest, take my neck between his hands and squeeze...
squeeze ... with all his strength, trying to strangle me.

I for my part struggle madly, hampered by that terrible
helplessness which paralyses us in dreams. I try to cry out
—I can’t; I try to move-I can’t; gasping for breath and
making frantic efforts, I try to turn over, to throw off this
creature who is crushing me and choking me-I can’t!

And suddenly I wake up panic-stricken, bathed in sweat.
I light a candle. I am alone. ‘

After this nightmare, which is repeated every night, I
finally fall into a peaceful sleep which lasts until dawn.

2 June. My condition has grown worse than ever. What
can be the matter with me? The bromide is useless, the
showers are useless. Just now, to tire out a body already

316

THE HORLA

. exhausted enough, I went for a walk in Roumare Forest.

At first I thought that the fresh air, the clear mild air, full
of the scent of leaves and grass, was pouring new blood
into my veins, new energy into my heart. I set off down a

broad avenue, then turned towards La Bouille down a

narrow walk between two ranks of tremendously tall trees,
which stretched a thick roof of an almost black green
between the sky and me.

A shiver suddenly ran through me, not a shiver of cold
but a strange shiver of fear. ;

I quickened my pace, uneasy at being alone in this wood,
foolishly frightened for no reason by the profound solitude.
All of a’sudden it seemed to me that I was being followed,
that somebody was hard on my heels, very close, near
enough to touch me, ;

I swung round. I was alone. I could see nothing behind
me but the long, straight walk, empty, high, terrifyingly
empty; and in front of me too it stretched away as far as
the eyes could see, the same in every way, and just as

- frightening.

TI shut my eyes; I don’t know why. And I started spin-
ning- around on one heel, very fast, like a top. I almost
fell; I opened my eyes again; the trees were dancing; the
earth was swaying; I was forced to sit down. But now I
didn’t know which way I had come! How odd! How very
odd! I had absolutely no idea. I set off towards the right
and eventually found myself back in the avenue which had ~
taken me into the middle of the forest.

3 June. Last night was terrible. I am going to go away
for a few weeks. A short holiday will probably put me
right.

.2 July. Home again. I am completely cured. What is

317



--- Page 6 ---
THE HORLA

more, I have had a delightful holiday. I visited Mont
Saint-Michel, which I had never seen before.

What a splendid sight meets your eyes when you arrive
at Avranches, as I did, about disk! The town stands on‘a
hill, and I was taken into the municipal park on the out-
skirts. I uttered a cry of astonishment. An immense bay

stretched out before me as far as the eye could see, between ©

two widely separated coasts which disappeared into far-off
mists; and in the middle of this vast yellow bay under a
pale golden sky, a strange hill, dark and pointed, rose up
from the sands. The sun had just disappeared, and sil-
houetted against a horizon still ablaze with fire was that

fantastic rock, bearing a no less fantastic monument on its .

summit. ;

At dawn I went out to see it. The tide was out, as it had
been the previous evening, and I saw the astonishing abbey
grow in height before my éyes as I drew closer to it. After
walking for several hours I reached the huge pile of rocks
which bears the little city dominated by the great church.
Climbing the steep, narrow street, I entered the most
wonderful Gothic dwelling made for God on this earth, a
building as vast as a town, full of low rooms under oppres-
sive ceilings, and lofty galleries supported by frail pillars.
Tentered that gigantic granite jewel, which is as delicate ‘as
a piece of lacework, thronged with towers and slender
belfries pierced by spiral staifcases, towers and belfries
which thrust into the blue sky of day and the black sky of
night their strange heads bristling with chimeras, devils,

fantastic beasts ‘and ‘monstrous flowers, and which are -

linked together by carved arches of intricate design.
When I reached the top I said to the monk accompany-
ing me: ‘Father, what a wonderful place this is!”
“The winds are very strong,’ he replied, and we started

318

THE HORLA

chatting together as we watched the tide coming in, sweep-\
ing across the sands and covering them with steel armour.
The monk told me a great many stories, all the stories
of that place, legends, more legends and still more legends.
One of them impressed me enormously. The local in-
habitants, the people who live on the mount, claim to hear
voices at night on the sands, followed -by the sound of two
goats, one bleating loudly, the other softly. Sceptics insist
that what they hear is the screeching of the gulls, which
sometimes sounds like bleating and sometimes like the wail
of human voices; but fishermen returning late at night
swear that between one tide and the next, near the little
town cut off from the world, they have met an old shep-
herd wandering on the dunes. Nobody has ever seen his
head, which is hidden by his cloak, but he leads behind
him a goat with the face of a man and a she-goat with the _
face of a woman, both of them with long white hair and

' constantly talking, quarrelling in an unknown tongue,

then suddenly breaking off to bleat at the tops of their
voices.

‘Do you believe that story?’ I asked the monk.

‘I don’t know,’ he murmured.

‘If,’ I went on, ‘there existed on this earth creatures other

_ than ourselves, how could we have failed to know of their

existence long ago? Why haven’t you seen them? Why
haven’t I seen them myself?’ . :
He replied: ‘Do we see a hundred-thousandth part of all
that exists?. Take the wind, for instance, the greatest force
in Nature, which knocks down men, blows down buildings,
uproots trees, whips up the sea into watery mountains,
destroys.cliffs and hurls great ships on to the reefs; the wind
which kills, whistles, groans and roars—have you seen it, |
can you see it? And yet it exists.’

319



--- Page 7 ---
THE HORLA

In the face of this simple reasoning I fell silent. This

man was cither a sage or a fool. I could not have said |

which, but I held my peace. For what he had just said,
I had often thought. :

3 July. I slept badly last night. There must be a feverish
influence at work here, for my coachman is suffering from
the same trouble as myself. Coming home yesterday, I
noticed his curious pallor.

“What’s the matter with you, Jean?’ I asked.

JI can’t get a good night’s sleep any more, Monsieur. My
nights Just.eat into my days. Since you went away, Mon-
sieur, it’s been like that all the time.’

The other servants: are all right, however, but I am
terrified of its taking hold of me again.

4 july. It has taken hold of me again all right. My old
nightmares have come back. Last night I felt somebody
squatting on top of me, pressing his mouth against mine
and drinking my life through my lips. Yes, he was-drain-
ing it out of. my throat like a leech. Then he got off me,
sated, and I woke up so bruised and battered and exhausted
that I couldn’t move. If this goes on for many more days I
shall certainly go away again.

5 July. Have I lost my reason? What happened last night
is so peculiar that my head reels just to think of it.

I had locked my door, as I do now every evening; then,
feeling thirsty, I drank half a glass of water, and I hap-
pened to notice that my carafe was full right up to the
crystal stopper.

After that I went to bed, falling into one of my dreadful

-slumbers from which I was roused about two hours later

320

esealy

THE HORLA

by a shock more frightful than any I had experienced
before. ;

Imagine a man who is stabbed to death in his sleep and
who wakes up with a knife in his lung, with a death-rattle
in his throat, covered with blood, unable to breathe, on the
point of death, and incapable of understanding what has -
happened to him — and there you have what I felt.

When I had finally come to my senses I felt thirsty
again; I lit a candle and went over to the table on which
my carafe was standing. I picked it up and tipped it over
my glass; nothing came out. It was empty! It was com-
pletely empty! At first I was utterly mystified; then, all of
a sudden, such a terrible feeling swept over me that I had
to sit down, or rather, that I collapsed into a chair. Then I
jumped to my feet to look around me. After that I sat down
again, frantic with fear and surprise in face of the trans-
parent carafe. I gazed at it with a fixed stare, trying to

find an answer to the riddle. My hands were trembling. .

Somebody must have drunk the water, but who? I myself
perhaps? Yes, it could only have been myself! In that case
I was a sleepwalker; unknown to myself I was living that
mysterious double life which makes us wonder whether
there are two creatures in us or whether, when our mind
is asleep, some alien being, invisible and unknowable, takes

control of our captive body, which obeys that other being

as it obeys us, or even more readily than it obeys us.
Oh, who can ever understand my dreadful anguish?
Who can understand the feelings of a sane-minded, wide-

awake, thoroughly rational man as he gazes in horror into

a glass.carafe, looking for a little water which has dis-
appeared during his sleep? I stayed there until daybreak,

_hot daring to go back to bed.

325



--- Page 8 ---
THE HORLA

6 July. J am going mad. All the water in my carafe was
drunk again last night; or rather, I drank it.

But did I? Was it I? Who else could it be? Who? Oh,
God, I'am going mad! Who can save me?

ro July. J have been carrying out some astonishing experi-
ments. I am definitely insane! And yet. ..

On 6 July, before going to bed, I set out on my table
some wine, milk, water, bread and strawberries.

Somebody drank—I drank ~—all the water and a little
milk, The wine was left untouched, as were the straw-
berries and the bread. ;

On 7 July I carried out the same experiment, with the
same result. .

On 8 July I cut out the water and the milk. Nothing was
touched.

Finally, on g July, I put out the water and the milk again,
but by themselves, taking care to wrap the carafes in white
muslin cloths and to tie down the stoppers. Then I rubbed
my lips, my beard and my hands with black lead, and went
to bed. :

The same irresistible sleep took hold of me, followed
shortly afterwards by the same horrible awakening. I had
not stirred; the sheets themselves were unmarked. I rushed
over to my table. The cloths wrapped around the carafes
were still spotless. I untied the strings, quivering with fear.
All the water had been drunk! All the milk had been
drunk! God Almighty!

Iam leaving in a few minutes for Paris.

12 July. Paris. I obviously lost my head these last few
days. I must have been the plaything of my fevered imagina-

tion, unless I really am a sleepwalker, or unless I have fallen |

under one of those well authenticated but so far inexplicable

322

a ne

THE HORLA

influences known as suggestions. In any case my terror

-bordered on madness, and twenty-four hours in Paris have

been enough to restore my mental equilibrium.

Yesterday, after doing some shopping and paying a few
calls, which put fresh life and spirit into me, I ended the
day at the Théatre-Frangais. They were presenting a play
by the’ younger Dumas, and his lively, powerful mind com-
pleted my cure. There can be no doubt that solitude is
dangerous for active minds. We need to be surrounded by
men who think and talk. When we are alone for any length
of time we people the void with phantoms.

I returned to my hotel in high spirits, walking along the
boulevards. Amid the jostling of the crowd I thought,
somewhat contemptuously, about my fears and suppositions
of last week, when I believed, yes, believed, that an in-
visible being was living in my house. How weak our minds
‘are, and how easily they are shaken and troubled as soon as
they are confronted with a tiny incomprehensible fact!

Instead of coming to the simple conclusion: ‘I don’t
understand because the cause escapes me’, we promptly
imagine terrifying mysteries and supernatural powers.

14 July. Bastille Day. I went for a stroll through the
streets. The fireworks and flags filled me with a childish
pleasure. Yet it is really very silly to be happy on a set day,
by order of the government. The nation is a stupid herd,
alternating between imbecile acceptance and savage re:
bellion. You say to it: ‘Enjoy yourself.’ It enjoys itself. You
say to it: ‘Go and fight your neighbour.’ It goes to fight.
You say to it: “Vote for the Emperor.’ It votes for the
Emperor. Then you say to it: ‘Vote for the Republic.’ And
it votes for the Republic. ‘

- Its rulers‘are just. as stupid; but instead of obeying men
they obey principles, which can only be ridiculous, sterile

323



--- Page 9 ---
THE HORLA

and false,.by reason of the very fact that they are principles,
that is to say ideas which are regarded as certain and im-
mutable, in this world where nobody can be sure of any-
thing, since light and sound are both illusions.

16 July. Yesterday I saw some things which have deeply
disturbed me.

I was dining with my cousin, Madame Sablé, whose hus-
band is in command of the 76th Light Horse at Limoges.
At her house I found myself sitting with two young women,
one of whom is married to a doctor, Doctor Parent, who
devotes a great deal of his time to nervous illnesses and the
extraordinary phenomena produced by recent experiments
in hypnotism and suggestion. ;

He gave us a lengthy account of the astonishing results
obtained by English scientists and the doctors of the Nancy
school.

The facts he put forward struck me as so peculiar that I
confessed that I was a complete sceptic.

“We are,’ he maintained, ‘on the point of discovering one
of Nature’s most important secrets on this earth, for she un-
‘doubtedly has far more important secrets out there among
the stars, Ever since man began to think, ever since he
learned how to express and record his thoughts, he has been
aware of the existence close beside him of a mystery im-
pervious to his crude, imperfect senses and he has tried to
compensate for his physical incapacity by the strength of his
intelligence. As long as his intelligence remained in a rudi-
mentary state this ‘obsession with invisible phenomena took
crude and simple forms. That is the explanation of the
popular notions of the supernatural, the legends of wander-
ing spirits, fairies, gnomes, ghosts — I would even say the
legend of God as well, for our concepts of the artificer-
creator, from whatever religion they come to us, are really

324

4

THE HORLA

the most uninspired, stupid, unacceptable inventions ever
devised by a terrified brain. Nothing could be truer than
Voltaire’s dictum: “God made man in his own image, but
man has taken his revenge in kind.”

‘However, for just over a century now, we seem to have
had glimpses of something new. Mesmer and a few others
have set our feet on a new path and, especially in the last
four or five years, we have obtained some astonishing

" results.’

My cousin, who like myself was very sceptical, smiled.
Doctor Parent asked her: ‘Shall I try to put you to sleep,
Madame?’

“Yes, if you wish.’

She sat down in an armchair and he fixed her with a
hypnotic stare. I for my part felt suddenly uneasy, my heart
pounding wildly and my throat contracted. I saw Madame
Sablé’s eyes grow drowsy, her lips tighten, her breasts rise
and fall. ;

Within ten minutes she was asleep.

‘Go behind her,’ said the doctor.

I sat down behind her. He put a visiting card in her hands
and said: “This is a mirror: what can you see in it?’

‘I can see my cousin,’ she replied.

‘What is he doing?’

‘He’s twisting his moustache.’

‘And now?’

‘He’s taking a photograph out of his pocket.’

“Whose photograph is it?’

‘A photograph of himself.’

She was right! And that photograph had just been de-
livered to me, that very evening, at my hotel.

“What is he doing in the photograph?’

‘He’s standing with his hat in his hand.’

She could obviously see things in that card, in that piece

335



--- Page 10 ---
THE HORLA

of white cardboard, as she would have seen them: in a
mirror. The young women cried out in horror: ‘Enough!
That’s enough!’
But the doctor said in an authoritative tone of voice: “You
will get up tomorrow at eight o’clock. Then you will go to
" see your cousin at his hotel and beg him to lend you five
thousand francs which your husband has asked you to
obtain and will ask you for on his next leave.’

Then he woke her up.

On my way back to the hotel I thought about this curious
séance, and J was assailed by doubts, not as to the absolute,
unquestionable good faith of my cousin, whom I had known
like a sister since my childhood, but as to the possibility of a

‘trick on the part of the doctor. Might he not have had a
mirror concealed in his hand which he had shown the
young woman at the same time as his visiting card? Pro-
fessional conjurors do much stranger things than that.

As soon as I got back to the hotel I went to bed.

Well, this morning, about half past eight, I was awoken”

by my man who said to me: ‘Madame Sablé is here,
Monsieur, asking to see you straight away.’

I dressed hurriedly and had her shown in. ;

She sat down, looking extremely agitated, her eyes down-
cast, and, without raising her veil, said: ‘My dear cousin, I
have a great favour to ask you.’

“What is it, cousin?’

‘I find it very embarrassing to tell you, and yet I must.
I need five thousand francs desperately.’

‘You need five thousand francs? Oh, come now!’

“Yes, I do. Or rather my husband does, and he has told me
to get them.’

I was so astonished that I stammered as I spoke to her. I
wondered whether she and Doctor Parent might. not be

326

THE HORLA

making fun of me, and whether this might not be just a
comedy planned in advance and very well acted.

But when’ I looked closely at her, all my doubts vanished.
This request for money was so distasteful to her that she
was trembling with anguish, and I could see that she was
choking back sobs. ;

I knew that she was extremely rich,. and I went on:
‘What! Do you mean to say that your husband can’t lay his
hands on five thousand francs? Come now, think. Are you
sure that he told you to ask me for them?’

She hesitated for a few moments as if she were making a
_Breat effort to search her memory. Then she replied: “Yes

- yes... I’m sure he did.’

‘Did he tell you in a letter?’

She hesitated again, thinking over my question. I guessed
* at the agonizing torment of her mind. She didn’t know. All
. that she knew was that she had to borrow five thousand
francs from me for her husband. So she plucked up enough
courage to lie.

“Yes, he told me in a letter.’

‘But when. did he write to you? You didn’t say anything
to me about it yesterday.’

‘I got his letter this morning.’

“Can you let me see it?”

‘No...no...no...it was very private...too personal

-Pve... Ive burnt it.’

‘So your husband is in debt, is he?’

She hesitated again, then murmured: ‘I don’t know.’

I told her curtly: “The fact is, my dear cousin, I can’t lay
my hands on the five thousand francs just now.’

She let out a sort of anguished cry.

. ‘Oh, please, ‘please get the money for me...’
She grew more and more excited, clasping her hands to-

327



--- Page 11 ---
THE HORLA

gether as if she were praying to me. The tone of her voice
changed as she spoke; she wept and stammered, harassed
and dominated by the irresistible order she had received.

‘Oh, I beg you, I implore you. ... If you only knew how
unhappy I am. ... I have to have the money today.’

I took pity on her.

“You shall have it later today, I promise you.’

are!’

‘Do you remember,’ I went on, ‘what happened at your
house yesterday?’ !

‘Yes.’ °

‘Do you remember that Doctar Parent put you to sleep?’

‘Yes.’ ;

“Well, he ordered you to come and borrow five thousand
francs from me this morning, and you are now obeying
that order.’

She thought this over for a few moments and replied:
“Because may husband wants the money.’

For a whole hour I tried to convince her, but all in
vain. :

After she had left I ran to the doctor’s house. He was just
going out, and he listened to me with a smile. Then he
said: ‘Now do you believe?’ ;

‘I have no alternative.’
- ‘Let’s go to see your cousin.’

She was already dozing on a chaise longue, utterly worn
out. The doctor felt her pulse and gazed at her for some
time, with one hand pointing at her eyes, which she

gradually closed under the irresistible influence of that
magnetic force.

When she had been put to sleep he told her:

“Your husband no longer needs those five thousand

francs. You will therefore forget that you asked your cousin

328

“Oh, thank you, thank you!’ she cried. ‘How kind you

THE HORLA

to lend them to you, and, if he mentions it to you, you will
not understand.’ .

Then he woke her up. I took a wallet out of my pocket.

‘Here, my dear cousin,’ I said, ‘is what you asked me for
this morning.’

She was so astonished that I-did not dare to press the
point. All the same, I tried to stir her memory, but she
denied everything fiercely, thought I was making fun of
her, and in the end nearly lost her temper.

I have just got back to the hotel and been unable to eat
any lunch because this experience has disturbed me so

profoundly.

19 July. A lot of people I have told about this adventure
have made fun of me. I don’t know what to think about it
now. The wise man says: Perhaps?

21 July. I dined today at Bougival, then spent the evening
at the rowing-club dance. There can be no doubt that every-
thing depends on, places and settings. To believe in the
supernatural-on the island of La Grenouillére would be the
height of folly.... But at the top of Mont Saint-Michel?. ..
Or in India? We fall irresistibly under the influence of our

_surroundings. I am going home next week.

30 July. J arrived home yesterday. All is well.

2 August. Nothing new. The weather is glorious. I spend
my days watching the Seine flow by.

4 August. My servants are quarrelling among themselves.
They maintain that somebody keeps breaking the glasses in
the cupboards ‘at night. My man blames the cook, who
blames the linen-maid, who blames the other two. Which

329



--- Page 12 ---
THE HORLA

of them is the culprit? It would take a clever man to find
out.

6 August. This time I’m not,mad. I’ve seen it... P’ve seen
it... I've seen it!...I still feel cold right down to my
fingertips... .I still feel chilled to the marrow... [ve seen
it!

At two o’clock, in broad daylight, I was strolling in my
rose-garden...among the autumn roses which are just
beginning to come out. ,

As I stopped to look at a Géant des Batailles which bore
three magnificent flowers, I saw, distinctly saw, right in
front of me, the stem of one of those roses bend as if an
invisible hand had twisted it, then break as if that same
hand had plucked it. Then the flower swept upwards,
describing the curve an arm would have made carrying it
towards a mouth, and remained suspended in the limpid
air, all alone, motionless, a terrifying splash of red three
paces from my eyes. .

I rushed madly at it to grasp it. There was nothing there:
it had disappeared. Then I was filled with a furious rage
against myself, for a sane, serious-minded man doesn’t have
hallucinations like that.

But was it really an hallucination? I turned round to look
for the stem, and I found it straight away on the bush,
newly broken, between the other two roses which still
remained on the branch.

Then I came back into the house utterly appalled, for I
am certain now, as certain as I am that night follows day,
that an invisible creature exists beside me which feeds on
milk and water, which can touch things, pick them up and
move them about, which is therefore endowed with a
material nature, imperceptible though it may be to our
senses, and which is living like myself beneath my roof...

330

THE HORLA

7 August. Y had a peaceful night. He drank the water in
my carafe, but he did not disturb my sleep.
I wonder if I am mad. While I was walking along the

"river bank just now, in the blazing sunshine, I was afflicted

with doubts as to my sanity, not vague doubts such as I
have had before, but detailed, well-founded doubts. I have
seen some miadmen in my time; I have known some who
remained intelligent, lucid, even clear-headed, about every-
thing in life except one single point. They would talk
clearly, easily and profoundly about everything, until all of
a sudden their mind ran aground on the reef of their mad-
ness and was torn to pieces, scattered to the winds and sunk
without trace in that fearful raging sea, full of surging
waves, fogs and squalls, which we call ‘insanity’.

1 would certainly think that I was utterly and completely
mad if I were not in full possession of my faculties, if I
were not perfectly aware of my state of mind, if I were not
able to sound it and analyse it with absolute lucidity. I
would therefore seem to be just suffering from hallucina-
tions while remaining perfectly sane. Some unknown dis-
turbance must have taken place in my brain, one of those
disturbances which modern physiologists are trying to
examine and elucidate; and this disturbance has presumably
opened up a deep chasm in my mind, in the logical order of
my ideas. Similar phenomena occur in dreams when they
take us through the most improbable phantasmagoria
without our feeling any surprise, because the mechanism of
checking and verification is asleep, while the imaginative
faculty is awake and working. May not the explanation be
that one of the imperceptible keys of my cerebral keyboard
is jammed? Sometimes, after an accident, a man loses his
memory for proper names, or verbs, or figures, or simply
dates. The localization of all the various divisions of the
mind has now been conclusively established. It is scarcely a

331



--- Page 13 ---
THE HORLA

matter for surprise, therefore, that my ability to verify the
unreality of certain hallucinations should be impaired just
now.
Such were my thoughts as I strolled along beside the
water. The sunshine covered the river with light, made the
earth a place of beauty, and filled my heart with a feeling of
love for life, for the swallows whose swift flight rejoices my
eyes, for the riverside grasses whose whispering charms my
ears.

Little by little, however, an inexplicable uneasiness came
stealing over me. Some force, it seemed to me, some occult

force was slowing me down, stopping me, preventing me’
from going any farther, calling me back. I felt that distress-

ing impulse to turn back which takes hold of you when you
have left someone you love at home ill and you have a pre-
sentiment that the illness has taken a turn for the worse.
So, in spite of myself, I turned back, convinced that I
would find bad news at home, a letter or a telegram. There
was nothing, and I was left feeling more puzzled and more
uneasy than if I had had another fantastic vision. ,

8 August. Yesterday I had a terrible evening. He no
longer shows himself but I can feel him near me, spying on
me, watching me, penetrating me, dominating me, and
more to be feared when he hides in this way than if he

revealed his constant invisible presence by supernatural .

phenomena.
I slept well all the same.

9 August. Nothing, but I am afraid.
to August. Nothing; what will happen tomorrow?

r1 August. Still nothing; I cannot stay at home any longer

332

THE HORLA

with this fear and these thoughts in my mind; I shall go
away. ;

12 August. Ten o’clock at night. All day I have wanted to
* go away; I couldn’t do it. All day I have wanted to perform
. that easy, simple act, which would have given me my free-
. dom -- to go outside and get into my carriage and drive to
Rouen; I couldn’t do it. Why?

13 August. When certain illnesses affect you, all the
springs in your physical being seem broken, all your energy
exhausted, all your muscles as soft as flesh and your flesh as
liquid as water. In a strange, distressing way, I feel as if all
this had happened to my spiritual being. I no longer have
any strength, any courage, any control over myself, even
any power to set my will in motion. I can no longer will
anything; but someone wills things for me — and I obey.

14 August. I am done for! Someone is in possession of
my mind and controlling it! Someone is directing my every
act, my every movement, my every thought. I no longer
count for anything within myself; I am nothing but a
terrified, captive spectator of all the things I do. I want to
go out..I cannot. He does not want to; and I remain,
trembling and panic-stricken in the armchair where he
keeps me seated. I want no more than to stand up, to rise
from my seat so that I may believe that I am still my own
master. I cannot! I am riveted to my chair, and my. chair
» cleaves to the floor, so that no power on-earth could possibly
lift us.

Then, all of a sudden, I must, must, must go to the
bottom of. my garden to pick some strawberries and eat
them.-And I go. I pick some strawberries and I eat them! -
Oh, God! God! God! Is there a God? If there is, then

333



--- Page 14 ---
THE HORLA

deliver me! Save me! Help me! Forgive me! Take pity on

me! Have mercy on me! Save me! Oh, what suffering!
What torment! What terror!

15 August. This is exactly how my poor cousin was
possessed and dominated when she came to borrow five
thousand francs from me. She was in the power of an alien
will which had entered into her, like another soul, a
parasitic, tyrannical soul. Is the world coming to an end?
But what is this being who dominates me, this unknow-
able creature, this invisible wanderer of a supernatural race?
So the Invisible Ones exist! Then why, since the world
began, have they never manifested themselves as clearly as
they have to me? I have never read of anything like the
things that have happened in my house. Oh; if only I could

leave it, if only I could go away, flee and never return! I
should be saved, but I can’t do it.

16 August, Today I managed to escape for two hours, like
a prisoner who finds the door of his dungeon accidentally
left open. I felt that I was free all of a sudden, and that he
was far away. I ordered the horses to be harnessed as quickly
as possible, and I drove to Rouen. Oh, what a joy it was to
be able to tell a man: ‘Drive to Rouen,’ and to be ‘obeyed.

' I stopped at the library and asked them to lend me
Doctor Hermann Herestauss’s great treatise on the un-
known inhabitants of the ancient and modern worlds,

Then, just as I was getting back into my carriage, I
meant to say: ‘Drive to the station,’ but instead I shouted —
I didn’t say, I shouted — in such a loud voice that the
passers-by turned round: ‘Drive home,’ and I fell back on

.the cushions of my carriage, utterly panic-stricken. He had
come back and taken possession of me once more.

334

Keene eae ton oe oe ea Se

THE HORLA ~

17 August. Oh, what a night! What a night! Yet it
seems to me that I ought to feel pleased. I'read until one
o’clock in the morning. Hermann Herestauss, a doctor of
philosophy and theology, has written a book on the history
and manifestation of all the invisible beings who haunt

‘mankind or have been invented by men’s minds. He

describes their origins, their domain, their powers. But none
of them is at all like the one who is haunting me. It is as if
ever since man has been capable of thought he has had a
fearful presentiment of some new being, more powerful
than himself, his successor in this world, and, feeling the
proximity of this master, but unable to guess at its nature,
he has created in his terror the whole fantastic host of occult
beings, vague phantoms born of fear.

Well, after reading until one o’clock in the morning, |
went and sat down by my open window to cool ‘my head
and refresh my mind in the gentle night air.

It was fine and warm. How I would have enjoyed that
night in former days!

No moon. The stars shimmered and twinkled in the
depths of the dark sky. Who lives in those worlds? What
forms of life, what living creatures, what animals, what
plants exist out there? What do the thinking creatures in
those distant worlds know that is outside our knowledge?
What can they do that is beyond our power? What can they
see that we do not know? Will not one of them, sooner or
later, on his way through space, appear on our earth to
conquer it, just as the Normans once crossed the seas to
subjugate weaker peoples?

For we humans are so weak, so defenceless, so ignorant,
so small on this speck of dust spinning around in a drop of
water! ;

_I dozed off, dreaming like this in the fresh night air.

After sleeping for about forty minutes I opened my eyes



--- Page 15 ---
THE HORLA

without moving, awakened by some strange, vague emo-
tion. At first I saw nothing; then, all of a sudden, I had the
impression that a page of the book lying open on my table
had turned over by itself. Yet not a breath of air had come
in through my window. Surprised, I waited’ and watched.
After about four minutes I saw — yes, I saw with my own
eyes — another page rise in the air and fall on the preceding
one, as if a finger had turned it over. My armchair was
empty, seemed empty; but I realized that he was there,
sitting in my place, reading. With one wild bound, like the
bound of a maddened animal about to tear its trainer to
pieces, I sprang across the room to seize him, throttle him,
kill him. ... But before I reached it my chair tipped over as
if someone had fled from me, my table rocked, my lamp
fell over and went out, and my window closed as if some
thief, caught in the act, had jumped out into the night,
slamming it shut behind him. .

aa he had run away; he had been frightened, frightened

- of me!

In that case... in that case...tomorrow...or the day
after ...or some day in the future, I shall be able to seize
him between my hands and force him to the ground! Don’t
dogs sometimes bite their masters and fly at their throats?

18 August. I have been thinking all.day. Oh, yes, I shall
obey him, follow his impulses, carry out all his wishes,

make myself humble, servile, submissive. He has the upper
hand. But a time will come...

19 August: I know...I know...1 know everything! J
have just read this in the Revue du Monde Scientifique:

A. curious item of news has. reached us from Rio de Janeiro.
An epidemic of madness, comparable to those waves of col-
- lective insanity which affected the peoples of Europe in the

336

THE HORLA

lle Ages, is raging just now in the province of Sao Paulo.
e,frenzied inhabitants leave their houses, desert their villages
and abandon their fields; saying that they are pursued, pos-
d, and dominated like human cattle by invisible though
gible beings, vampires of some kind who feed on their
ality during their sleep and also drink water and milk
ithout apparently touching any other form of food.
Professor Don Pedro Henriquez, accompanied ‘by several
leading doctors, has left for the province of Sao Paulo, to study
on the spot the causes and ‘symptoms of this extraordinary nrad-
ness, and to recommend to the Emperor those measures which
he: considers most likely to restore the delirious inhabitants to”
sanity.

Ah, now I remember the splendid Brazilian three-master
which sailed past my windows on 8 May, on her way up
the Seine! I thought her so pretty, so white, so gay! But the |
Being was on board, having come all the way from that far-
off land where his race was born! And he saw me! He saw
my white house too; and he jumped ashore from the ship.
Oh, God! . .

Now I know, I understand. Man’s reign on earth is over.

He has come, he whom the primitive peoples dreaded in
their early fears, who was exorcized by anxious priests and
summoned on dark nights by sorcerers who never even saw
him. He whom the presentiments of the world’s temporary
masters endowed with the monstrous or pleasing forms of
gnomes, spirits, genii, fairies and hobgoblins. After the
crude concepts of primitive fears men of greater perspicacity:
came to see him more clearly. Mesmer guessed at his
essential character, and it is already ten years since the doc- -
tors discovered the precise nature of his power before he
exercised it himself. They have played with this weapon of
the new Lord, the imposition of a mysterious will upon the
enslaved minds of man. They call it magnetism, hypnotism,

337



--- Page 16 ---
THE HORLA

suggestion... heaven knows what else. I have seen them
toying with this terrible force like foolish children. Woe to
us! Woe to man! He has come, the... the... what is his
name?... the... it is as if he were shouting his name in my
ear, and I cannot hear it...the... yes... he zs shouting
it...I] am listening... cannot... say it again...the
---Horla...I heard it...the Horla...it is he...the
Horla.... He has come!

Oh, the vulture has eaten the dove, and the wolf has eaten
the lamb; the lion has devoured the sharp-horned buffalo,
and man has killed the lion with arrow, sword and gun;
but the Horla is going to make of man what we have made
of the horse and the ox: his chattel, his servant and his food,
by the mere exercise of his will. Woe to us!

Yet sometimes the animal rebels and kills its trainer... .
I too want...I could... but I must recognize him, touch
him, see him! Scientists say that an animal’s eye is-different
from ours and cannot see as ours does.... And my eye can-

- not make out this newcomer who is Oppressing me.

Why not? Oh; now I remember the words of the monk
on .Mont Saint-Michel: ‘Do we see a hundred-thousandth
part of all that exists? Take the wind, for instance, the
greatest force in Nature, which knocks down men, blows
down buildings, uproots trees, whips up the sea into watery
mountains, destroys cliffs and hurls great ships on to the
reefs, the wind which kills, whistles, groans and roars —
have you seen it, can you sce it? And yet it exists.’

And I thought too: my eyes are so weak, so imperfect that
they cannot even make out solid objects if they are trans-
parent like glass. If a sheet of plate glass bars my way I
hurl myself against it as a bird which has flown into.a room

_beats its head against the window panes. Countless other —

things deceive and mislead my eyes — so it is small wonder

338

ee

THE HORLA

that they should be unable to distinguish a new object which
allows light to pass through it. ; ;

“A new being! Why not? Such a being was bound to
come, for why should we be the last? Why are we unable
to see'him, as we can see all other beings created before us?

Because his constitution is more perfect, his body more deli-

cate and complete than ours — ours which is so weak, so
clumsily conceived, encumbered with organs that are always
tired and strained like an over-complicated mechanism;
ours which lives like a plant or an animal, feeding
laboriously on air, grass and meat, a living machine subject
to disease, deformity and decay, short-winded, ill-regulated,
simple and complex, ingeniously ill-made, crudely and deli-
cately constructed, a rough model of a being which might
become intelligent and impressive.

There have been so few different creatures in this world,
from the oyster to man. Why not one more, once we have
reached the end of the interval between the successive
appearances of the various species? :

Why not one more? Why not other trees ag well, bearing
huge bright flowers filling whole regions with their scent?
Why not other elements than fire, air, earth and water?
There are only four of them, only four of those sources of
life and strength! What a pitiful number! Why not forty,
four hundred, four thousand? How poor, mean and

wretched everything is, grudgingly given, poorly designed,

clumsily made. Think of the grace of the elephant and the
hippopotamus! Think of the elegance of the camel!
But what about that winged flower, the butterfly? you

will say. I can imagine one as big as a hundred worlds,

with wings whose shape, beauty, colour and movement, I
cannot find words to describe. But I can see it going from
star to star, refreshing and perfuming them with the gentle,

339°



--- Page 17 ---
THE HORLA

harmonious breath of its passage. And the peoples of the
universe watch it going by, in an ecstasy of delight.
But what is the matter with me? It is he, he, the Horla,
who is haunting me, filling my head with these mad ideas!
He is in me; he is taking possession of my soul; I shall kill

him!

19 August. I shall kill him! I have seen him! I sat down
yesterday evening at my table and made a great show of
concentrating on writing. I knew very well that he would
come and prowl around me, very close to me, so close that

I might perhaps be able to touch him, to seize him! And _

then!... Then I should have the strength of a desperate
man; I should have my hands, my knees, my chest, my
forehead, my teeth, to strangle him, crush him, bite him,
tear him to pieces.

I watched for him with all my senses on the alert.

I had lit both my lamps and the eight candles on my
mantelpiece, as if I thought that all this light would help
me to make him out.

In front of me was my bed, an old oak four-poster; on
my right, the fireplace; on my left, the door, which I had
carefully shut after leaving it open long enough to attract
him; and behind me, a very tall wardrobe with a mirror
front, which I use every day for shaving and dressing and
in which I used to inspect myself from head to -foot every
time I passed in front of it,

So there I was, pretending to be busy writing in order to
deceive him, for he was watching me too; and suddenly 1
felt, I was certain, that he was reading over my shoulder,
that he was there, brushing against my ear.

I jumped up with both hands outstretched, spinning
round so fast that I almost fell. Well?. .. It was as bright as
day, but I could not see myself in the mirror! It was empty

340

THE HORLA

- and bright, and full of light to the very depths. My reflec-
.tion was nowhere to be seen, yet I was standing right in

front of it! I could see the whole limpid piece of glass from
top to bottom. I stared at it with panic-stricken eyes, unable
to take a single step, to make the slightest movement, know-
ing that he was there, that his invisible body had swallowed
up my reflection, but aware that he was going to escape me
yet again.
” How frightened I was! Then, all of a sudden, I began to
see myself in a mist at the back of the mirror, as if I were
looking through a sheet of water; and it seemed to me that
this water was slowly gliding from left to right, so that my
reflection was becoming clearer every moment, It was like
the last stage of an eclipse. What was hiding me did not
seem to have clearly defined outlines, but a sort of opaque
transparency, growing gradually lighter.

Finally I was able to see myself completely, as I do every
day. when I look in the mirror. ; : ;

I had seen him! The horror of it lingers with me still,
making me shudder when I think of it.

20 August. 1 rust kill him, but how, seeing that I cannot
touch him? Poison? But he would see me putting it in the
water; and besides, would our poisons have any effect on
an invisible body? No, almost certainly not.... Then how?
...How?

21 August. I have sent for a locksmith from Rouen and
asked him to fit my room with iron shutters, such as certain
private houses in Paris have on the ground floor to keep out
burglars. He is also making me a door to match. I have got
myself the reputation of a coward, but what do I care?

to September, . Rouen; Hétel Continental. It is done... it

341



--- Page 18 ---
THE HORLA

is done... . But is he dead? I am still badly shaken by what
T have seen.

Yesterday, after the locksmith had put up my iron

shutters and my iron door, I left everything open until -

midnight, even though it was beginning to get cold.

All of a sudden I felt that he was there, and I was filled
with joy, an insane feeling of joy. I stood up slowly and
strolled up and down the room for a long time, so that he
should suspect nothing; then I took off my shoes and
casually put on my slippers; then I closed my iron shutters,
and, sauntering back to the door, I closed that too, double-
locking it. Returning to the window, I secured it with a
padlock, putting the key in my pocket.

Suddenly I realized that he was circling excitedly around
me, that he in his turn was afraid, that he was ordering me
to open the door and let him out. I almost gave way, but
held fast in the end. Instead, standing with my back to the
door, I opened it a little way, just far enough for me to slip
out backwards; and as I am very tall, my head touched the
lintel. I was sure that he could not have escaped, and I
locked him in by himself, all by himself. How wonderful!
I had him! Then I ran downstairs ; in the drawing-room,
which is directly underneath my bedroom, I picked up my
two lamps and emptied all the oil on to the carpet, the
furniture, everything; then I set fire to it and fled, after
carefully double-locking the big front door.

T went and hid at the bottom of my garden, in a clump
of laurels. What a time it took! What a long time! Every-
thing was dark, silent, still; not a breath of air, not a single
star; just mountainous clouds which I could not see, but
which lay heavily, oh, so heavily, on my soul.

I watched my house and waited. What a long time it
took! I was beginning to think that the fire had gone out

by itself, or that Ae had put it out, when one of the ground |

THE: HORLA

x windows fell out under the pressure of the fire, and a.
me, a great red and yellow flame, a long, soft, caressing
e, licked its way up the white wall to the roof. A glow
ight poured out over the trees, the branches, the leaves,
a shudder of fear ran through them too. The birds
woke; a dog started howling; it seemed as if dawn were
reaking. Then two more windows exploded and I saw
at the entire ground floor of my house was now just a
ging furnace. Then a cry, a terrible cry, the heartrending
y of a. woman rang out through the night,-and two
lormer windows were flung open! I had forgotten my ser-

Then, frantic with horror, I started running towards the
illage, shouting: ‘Help! Help! Fire! Fire!’ I met people
“already on their way to the fire, and I turned back with
hem to watch.

y now the house was no more than a horrible, awe-
spiring funeral pyre, a monstrous pyre in which human
beings were burning, and fe was burning too, he, my
- prisoner, the new Being, the new master, the Horla!
Suddenly the entire roof fell in, and a volcano of flames
. shot up towards the sky.

Through every window opening into the furnace I could
see the. fiery cauldron, and I thought to myself that he was
there, in that oven, dead... ;

Dead? Perhaps. Or perhaps that body of his, through
which the light of day could pass, was impervious to the
means of destruction which kill our bodies?

Suppose he was not dead?... Perhaps only time alone has.
power over that Invisible and Fearful Being. Why should
he possess that transparent, unknowable body, that spiritual
body, if he too must fear sickness, injury, infirmity,
premature destruction? ;

Premature destruction? That is the source of all human

343

ants! I saw their terrified faces and their waving arms... -



--- Page 19 ---
THE HORLA

dread. After man, the Horla. After him who can die any.
day, any hour, any minute, from any sort of accident, there
has come he who shall die only at his appointed day, hour
and minute, because. he has reached the limit of his
existence.

No...no..:I know beyond a doubt that he is not dead.

+. In that case...in that case...I shall have to kill —
myself.

pector epednare ia lepine ne cient

THE MASK

Tuer was a fancy-dress ball at the Flysée- Montmartre
that evening to celebrate Mid-Lent, and the crowd was
pouring into the brightly lit passage that led to the dance-
hall like water into a lock. The overwhelming clamour of
the orchestra was bursting through the walls and the roof
like a musical storm, to spread throughout the neighbour-
hood, arousing in the streets and even in the depths of the
nearby houses that irresistible desire to jump about, keep
warm, and have fun which slumbers deep in the human
animal.

The regular frequenters of the place were arriving from
all parts of Paris, people from all classes of society who en-
joyed vulgar, noisy fun which was a little squalid and
slightly depraved. There were clerks, pimps and tarts —
tarts of every sort, from those in common cotton to those in
the finest batiste, rich tarts, old and bejewelled, and poor
tarts of sixteen eager to paint the town red, go with men
and spend money. There were men of the world in evening
dress prowling about in the sweating crowd, in search of
young flesh, fruit with the bloom rubbed off but still tasty,
their eyes skinned and their noses following the scent. And
there were masked dancers who seemed chiefly inspired by
the desire to have a good time.

Groups of people had already gathered around the
famous quadrilles to watch their capers. The swaying
hedge, the quivering mass of men and women encircling
the four dancers, coiled itself round like a snake, advancing
and withdrawing in response to the movements of the four
performers. The two women, whose thighs seemed to be

345



