--- Page 1 ---
But they both looked at her skeptically. At that moment, throug!
the window with the broken pane, they could hear cries of distr
from an enormous crowd. :

“We're lost,” the woman said. “The city is in darkness. Better
tun away than to stay in this tottering old building.”

“Make her be silent,” the owner said to his companion. “Her shou
ing is spoiling my sleep.” :

She tried to open the door, but a horrible noise shook the towe:
“The staircase is collapsing,” she shouted. Irritated, the master of thé

[house took her in his hands. “I’ve ruled over the world,” he scolde:
“it shouldn’t be difficult for me to make you be quiet.” During this

/ time, flames began to light up the room. “Come, come, don’t be sd

{ nervous: we'll have no trouble getting along with each other.” As

wave of stone and sand struck the building, he held her tightly in h

arms.

“Ob no,” she said, “can’t you feel that we’re not standing on an

: thing?”

“* But he reassured her with his calmness, and when the tower co

lapsed and threw them outside, all three of them fell without saying
word.

i
;
i
u

1935, 193

50



--- Page 2 ---
There is, for every work, an infinity of possible variants. The present
version adds nothing to the pages entitled Thomas the'Obscure be-
gun in 1932, delivered to the publisher in May of 1940 and published
in 1941, but as it substracts a good deal from them, it may be said to be
another, and even an entirely new version. but identical at the same
time, if one is right in making no distinction between the figure and
that which is, or believes itself to be, its center, whenever the complete
figure itself expresses no more than the search for an imagined center.


--- Page 3 ---
I

THOMAS SAT DOWN and looked at the sea. He remained mo-
tionless fora time, as if he had come there to follow the movements of
the other swimmers and, although the fog prevented him from seeing
very far, he stayed there, obstinately, his eyes fixed on the bodies float-
ing with difficulty. Then, when a more powerful wave reached him,
he went down onto the sloping sand and slipped among the currents,
which quickly immersed him. The sea was calm, and Thomas was in
the habit of swimming for long periods without tiring. But today he
had chosen a new route. The fog hid the shore. A cloud had come
down upon the sea and the surface was lost in a glow which seemed
the only truly real thing. Currents shook him, though without giving

“him the feeling of being in the midst of the waves and of rolling in

familiar elements. The conviction that there was, in fact, no water at
all made even his effort to swim into a frivolous exercise from which
he drew nothing but discouragement. Perhaps he should only have
had to get control of himself to drive away such thoughts, but his eye
found nothing to cling to, and it seemed to him that he was staring
into the void with the intention of finding help there. It was then that
the sea, driven by the wind, broke loose. The storm tossed it, scattered
it into inaccessible regions; the squalls turned the sky upside down
and, at the same time, there reigned a silence and a calm which gave
the impression that everything was already destroyed. Thomas sought
to free himself from the insipid flood which was invading him. A pierc-
ing cold paralyzed his arms. The water swirled in whirlpools. Was 1
actually water? One moment the foam leapt before his eyes in whitist
flakes, the next the absence of water took hold of his body and drew i
along violently. His breathing became slower; for a few moments he

1


--- Page 4 ---
MAURICE BLANCHOT

held in his mouth the liquid which the squalls drove against his head: a
tepid sweetness, strange brew of a man deprived of the sense of taste.
Then, whether from fatigue or for an unknown reason, his limbs gave
him the same sense of foreignness as the water in which they were
tossed. This feeling seemed almost pleasant at first. As he swam, he
pursued a sort of revery in which he confused himself with the sea.
The intoxication of leaving himself, of slipping into the void, of dis-
persing himself in the thought of water, made him forget every dis-
comfort. And even when this ideal sea which he was becoming ever
more intimately had in turn become the real sea, in which he was vir-
tually drowned, he was not moved as he should have been: of course,
there was something intolerable about swimming this way, aimlessly,
with a body which was of no use to him beyond thinking that he was
swimming, but he also experienced a sense of relief, as if he had finally
discovered the key to the situation, and, as far as he was concerned, it
all came down to continuing his endless journey, with an absence of
organism in an absence of sea. The illusion did not last. He was forced
to roll from one side to the other, like a boat adrift, in the water which
gave him a body to swim. What escape was there? To struggle in order
not to be carried away by the wave which was his arm? To go under?
To drown himself bitterly in himself? That would surely have been the
moment to stop, but a hope remained; he went on swimming as if,
deep within the restored core of his being, he had discovered a new
possibility. He swam, a monster without fins. Under the giant micro-
scope, he turned himself into an enterprising mass of cilia and vibra~
tions. The temptation took on an entirely bizarre character when he
sought to slip from the drop of water into a region which was vague
and yet infinitely precise, a sort of holy place, so perfectly suited to
him that it was enough for him to be there, to be; it was like an imagi-
nary hollow which he entered because, before he was there, his im-
print was there already. And so he made a last effort to fit completely
inside. It was easy; he encountered no obstacles; he rejoined himself;
he blended with himself, entering into this place which no one else
could penetrate.

At last he had to come back. He found his way easily and his feet
touched bottom at a place which some of the swimmers used for div-
ing. The fatigue was gone. He still had a humming in his ears and a
burning in his eyes, as might be expected after staying too long in the

THOMAS THE OBSCURE

salt water. He became conscious of this as, turning toward the infinite
sheet of water reflecting the sun, he tried to tell in which direction he
had gone. At that point, there was a real mist before his sight, and he
could pick out absolutely anything in this murky void which his gaze
penetrated feverishly. Peering out, he discovered a man who was swim-
ming far off, nearly lost below the horizon. At such a distance, the
swimmer was always escaping him. He would see him, then lose sight
of him, though he had the feeling that he was following his every move:
not only perceiving him clearly all the time, but being brought near
him in a completely intimate way, such that no other sort of contact
could have brought him closer. He stayed a long time, watching and
waiting. There was in this contemplation something painful which
resembled the manifestation of an excessive freedom, a freedom ob-

tained by breaking every bond. His face clouded over and took on an
unusual expression.



--- Page 5 ---
II

HE NEVERTHELESS DECIDED to turn his back to the sea and
entered a small woods where he lay down after taking a few steps. The
day was about to end; scarcely any light remained, but it was still pos-
sible to see certain details of the landscape fairly clearly, in particular
the hill which limited the horizon and which was glowing, uncon-
cerned and free. What was disturbing to Thomas was the fact that he
was lying there in the grass with the desire to remain there for a long
time, although this position was forbidden to him. As night was falling
he tried to get up, and, pushing against the ground with both hands,
got one knee under him while the other leg dangled; then he made a
sudden lurch and succeeded in placing himself entirely erect. So he
was standing. As a matter of fact, there was an indecision in his way of
being which cast doubt on what he was doing. And so, although his
eyes were shut, it did not seem that he had given up seeing in the
darkness, rather the contrary. Likewise, when he began to walk, one
might have thought that it was not his legs, but rather his desire not to
walk which pushed him forward. He went down into a sort of vault
which at first he had believed to be rather large, but which very soon
seemed to him extremely cramped: in front, in back, overhead, wher-
ever he put out his hands, he collided brutally with a surface as hard as
a stone wall; on all sides his way was barred, an insurmountable wall all
around, and this wall was not the greatest obstacle for he had also to
reckon on his will which was fiercely determined to let him sleep there
in a passivity exactly like death. This was insane; in his uncertainty,
feeling out the limits of the vaulted pit, he placed his body right up
against the wall and waited. What dominated him was the sense of
being pushed forward by his refusal to advance. So he was not very



--- Page 6 ---
MAURICE BLANCHOT

surprised, so clearly did his anxiety allow him to see into the future,
when, a little later, he saw himself carried a few steps further along. A
few steps: it was unbelievable. His progress was undoubtedly more
apparent than real, for this new spot was indistinguishable from the
Jast, he encountered the same difficulties here, and it was in a sense
the same place that he was moving away from out of terror of leaving
it. At that moment, Thomas had the rashness to look around himself.
The night was more somber and more painful than he could have ex- .
pected. The darkness immersed everything; there was no hope of pass-
ing through its shadows, but one penetrated its reality in a relationship
of overwhelming intimacy. His first observation was that he could still
use his body, and particularly his eyes; it was not that he saw anything,
but what he looked at eventually placed him in contact with a noctur-
nal mass which he vaguely perceived to be himself and in which he was
bathed. Naturally, he formulated this remark only as a hypothesis, as a
convenient point of view, but one to which he was obliged to have
recourse only by the necessity of unraveling new circumstances. As he
had no means of measuring time, he probably took some hours before
accepting this way of looking at things, but, for him, it was as if fear
had immediately conquered him, and it was with a sense of shame that
he raised his head to accept the idea he had entertained: outside him-
self there was something identical to his own thought which his glance
or his hand could touch. Repulsive fantasy. Soon the night seemed to
him gloomier and more terrible than any night, as if it had in fact
issued from a wound of thought which had ceased to think, of thought
taken ironically as object by something other than thought. It was night
itself. Images which constituted its darkness inundated him. He saw
nothing, and, far from being distressed, he made this absence of vision
the culmination of his sight. Useless for seeing, his eye took on ex-
traordinary proportions, developed beyond measure, and, stretching
out on the horizon, let the night penetrate its center in order to re~
ceive the day from it. And so, through this void, it was sight and the
object of sight which mingled together. Not only did this eye which
saw nothing apprehend something, it apprehended the cause of its vi-
sion. It saw as object that which prevented it from seeing. Its own glance
entered into it as an image, just when this glance seemed the death of
all image. New preoccupations came out of this for Thomas. His soli-
tude no longer seemed so complete, and he even had the feeling that

THOMAS THE OBSCURE

something real had knocked against him and was trying to slip inside.
Perhaps he might have been able to interpret this feeling in some other
way, but he always had to assume the worst. What excuses him is the
fact that the impression was so clear and so painful that it was almost
impossible not to give way to it. Even ifhe had questioned its truth, he
would have had the greatest difficulty in not believing that something
extreme and violent was happening, for from all evidence a foreign
body had lodged itself in his pupil and was attempting to go further. It
was strange, absolutely disturbing, all the more disturbing because it
was not a small object, but whole trees, the whole woods still quiver-
ing and full of life. He felt this as a weakness which did him no credit.
He no longer even paid attention to the details of events. Perhaps a
man slipped in by the same opening, he could neither have affirmed
nor denied it. It seemed to him that the waves were invading the sort
of abyss which was himself. All this preoccupied him only slightly. He
had no attention for anything but his hands, busy recognizing the be-
ings mingled with himself, whose character they discerned by parts, a
dog represented by an ear, a bird replacing the tree on which it sang.
Thanks to these beings which indulged in acts which escaped all inter-
pretation, edifices, whole cities were built, real cities made of empti-
ness and thousands of stones piled one on another, creatures rolling in
blood and tearing arteries, playing the role of what Thomas had once
called ideas and passions. And so fear took hold of him, and was in no
way distinguishable from his corpse. Desire was this same corpse which
opened its eyes and knowing itself to be dead climbed awkwardly back
up into his mouth like an animal swallowed alive. Feelings occupied
him, then devoured him. He was pressed in every part of his flesh by a
thousand hands which were only his hand. A mortal anguish beat against
his heart. Around his body, he knew that his thought, mingled with
the night, kept watch. He knew with terrible certainty that it, too, was
looking for a way to enter into him. Against his lips, in his mouth, it
was forcing its way toward a monstrous union. Beneath his eyelids, it
created a necessary sight. And at the same time it was furiously de-
troying the face it kissed. Prodigious cities, ruined fortresses disap-

- peared. The stones were tossed outside. The trees were transplanted.

Hands and corpses were taken away. Alone, the body of Thomas re-

mained, deprived ofits senses. And thought, having entered him again,
exchanged contact with the void.


