--- Page 1 ---
Toni Morrisen

LECTURE AND

SPEECH OF ACCEPTANCE,

UPON THE AWARD OF THE
NOBEL PRIZE FOR LITERATURE,
DELIVERED IN STOCKHOLM ON
THE SEVENTH OF DECEMBER,
NINETEEN HUNDRED AND

NINETY-THREE

Chatto & Windus
LONDON



--- Page 2 ---
First published in the USA in 1994

13579108642

Copyright © 1993 by the Nobel Foundation

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the

prior permission of the publisher.

First published in the United Kingdom in 1994
by Chatto & Windus Limited, Random House,
20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 2SA

Random House Australia (Pty) Limited
fred Street, Milson’s Point,
ey, New South Wales 2061, Australia

20A
Sydni

Ran

Rand

Random House UK Limited Reg. No. 954009

lom House New Zealand Limited
18 Poland Road, Glenfield
Auckland 10, New Zealand

lom House South Africa (Pty) Limited
PO Box 337, Bergvlei, South Africa

ISBN: 0 7011 6235 X

ACIP catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library

Manufactured in the United States of America

Toni Morrison

“who, in novels characterized by vistonary

force and poetic import, gives life to an

essential aspect of American reality”

—SWEDISH ACADEMY

Pee



--- Page 3 ---
MEMBERS OF THE
SWEDISH ACADEMY,
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

Narrative has never been merely enter-
tainment for me. It is, I believe, one of
the principal ways in which we absorb
knowledge. I hope you will understand,
then, why I begin these remarks with
the opening phrase of what must be the
oldest sentence in the world, and the
earliest one we remember from child-

2

hood: “Once upon a time...’



--- Page 4 ---
“Once upon a time there was an old
woman. Blind but wise.” Or was it an

old man? A guru, perhaps. Or a griot ©
soothing restless children. I have heard

L this story, or one exactly like it, in the
lore of several cultures.

“Once upon a time there was an old
woman. Blind. Wise.”

In the version I know the woman is the
daughter of slaves, black, American,
and lives alone in a small house outside
: of town. Her reputation for wisdom is
without peer and without question.



--- Page 5 ---
Among her people she igs both the law
and its transgression. The honor she is
paid and the awe in which she is held
reach beyond her neighborhood to
places far away; to the city where the
intelligence of rural prophets is the
source of much amusement.

One day the woman is visited by some
young people who seem to be bent on
disproving her clairvoyance and show-
ing her up for the fraud they believe she
is. Their plan is simple: they enter her
house and ask the one question the an-
swer to which rides solely on her dif-
ference from them, a difference they
regard as a profound disability: her
blindness. They stand before her, and
one of them says,

“Old woman, I hold in my hand a bird.
Tell me whether it is living or dead.”

She does not answer, and the question
is repeated. “Is the bird I am holding
living or deadp”

Still she does not answer. She is blind

and cannot see her visitors, let alone

what is in their hands. She does not
know their color, gender or homeland.
She only knows their motive.

The old woman’s silence is so long, the
young people have trouble holding
their laughter. oO

Finally she speaks, and her voice is soft
but stern. “I don’t know,” she says. “I
don’t know whether the bird you are
holding is dead or alive, but what I do
know is that it is in your hands. It is in
your hands.”

Her answer can be taken to mean: ifit is
dead, you have either found it that way



--- Page 6 ---
or you have killed it. If it is alive, you
can still kill it. Whether it is to stay
alive is your decision. Whatever the
case, it is your responsibility.

For parading their power and her help-
lessness, the young visitors are repri-
manded, told they are responsible not
only for the act of mockery but also for
the small bundle of life sacrificed to
achieve its aims. The blind woman
shifts attention away from assertions of
power to the instrument through which
that power is exercised.

Speculation on what (other than its
own frail body) that bird in the hand
might signify has always been attrac-
tive to me, but especially so now, think-
ing as I have been about the work I do
that has brought me to this company.
So I choose to read the bird as language
and the woman as a practiced writer.

She is worried about how the language
she dreams in, given to her at birth, is
handled, put-into service, even with-
held from her for certain nefarious
purposes. Being a writer, she thinks
of language partly as a system, partly
as a living thing over which one has
control, but mostly as agency—as an
act with consequences. So the question
the children put to her, “Is it living

-or dead?,” is not unreal, because she

thinks of language as susceptible to
death, erasure; certainly imperiled and
salvageable only by an effort of the will.
She believes that if the bird in the hands
of her visitors is dead, the custodians

-are responsible for the corpse. For her a

dead language is not only one no longer
spoken or written, it is unyielding lan-
guage content to admire its own paral-
ysis. Like statist language, censored
and censoring. Ruthless in its policing
duties, it has no desire or purpose other



--- Page 7 ---
than to maintain the free range of its
own narcotic narcissism, its own exclu-
sivity and dominance. However, mori-
bund, it is not without effect, for it
actively thwarts the intellect, stalls
conscience, suppresses human poten-
tial. Unreceptive to interrogation, it
cannot form or tolerate new ideas,
shape other thoughts, tell another
story, fill baffling silences. Official lan-
guage smitheried to sanction ignorance
and preserve privilege is a suit of
armor, polished to shocking glitter, a
husk from which the knight departed
long ago. Yet there it is; dumb, preda-
tory, sentimental. Exciting reverence in
schoolchildren, providing shelter for
despots, summoning false memories of
stability, harmony among the public.

She is convinced that when language
dies, out of carelessness, disuse, indif-
ference, and absence of esteem, or killed

by fiat, not only she herself but all users
and makers are accountable for its
demise. In her country children have
bitten their tongues off and use bullets
instead to iterate the void of speech-
lessness, of disabled and disabling
language, of language adults have
abandoned altogether as a device for
grappling with meaning, providing
guidance, or expressing love. But she
knows tongue-suicide is not only the
choice of children. It is common among
the infantile heads of state and power
merchants whose evacuated language
leaves them with no access to what is
left of their human instincts, for they
speak only to those who obey, or in
order to force obedience.

The systematic looting of language can
be recognized by the tendency of its
users to forgo its nuanced, complex,
mid-wifery properties, replacing them



--- Page 8 ---
with menace and subjugation. Oppres-
sive language does more than represent
violence; it is violence; does more than
represent the limits of knowledge; it
limits knowledge. Whether it is ob-
scuring state language or the faux lan-
guage of mindless media; whether it is
the proud but calcified language of the
academy or the commodity-driven lan-
guage of science; whether it is the ma-
lign language of law-without-ethics, or
language designed for the estrange-
ment of minorities, hiding its racist
plunder in its literary cheek—it must
be rejected, altered and exposed. It is
the language that drinks blood, laps
vulnerabilities, tucks its fascist boots
under crinolines of respectability and

patriotism as it moves relentlessly:

toward the bottom line and the bot-
tomed-out mind. Sexist language, rac-
ist language, theistic language—all are
typical of the policing languages of

mastery, and cannot, do not, permit
new knowledge or encourage the mu-
tual exchange of ideas.

The. old woman is keenly aware that
no intellectual mercenary or insatiable
dictator, no paid-for politician or dema-
gogue, no counterfeit journalist would
be persuaded by her thoughts. There is
and will be rousing language to keep
citizens armed and arming; slaugh-'
tered and slaughtering in the malls,
courthouses, post offices, playgrounds,
bedrooms and _ boulevards; stirring,
memorializing language to mask the
pity and waste of needless death. There
will be more diplomatic language to
countenance rape, torture, assassina-
tion. There is and will be more seduc-
tive, mutant language designed to
throttle women, to pack their throats
like paté-producing geese with their
own unsayable, transgressive words;



--- Page 9 ---
there will be more of the language of

surveillance disguised as research; of |

politics and history calculated to ren-
der the suffering of millions mute;
language glamorized to thrill the dis-
satisfied and bereft into assaulting their
neighbors; arrogant pseudo-empirical
language crafted to lock creative people
into cages of inferiority and hope-
lessness. :

Underneath the eloquence, the glam-
our, the scholarly associations, however
stirring or seductive, the heart of such
language is languishing, or perhaps not
beating at all—if the bird is already
dead.

She has thought about what could have
been the intellectual history of any dis-
cipline if it had not insisted upon, or
been forced into, the waste of time and

life that rationalizations for and repre-

sentations of dominance required—
lethal discourses of exclusion blocking
access to cognition for both the ex-
cluder and the excluded.

The conventional wisdom of the Tower
of Babel story is that the collapse was a
misfortune. That it was the distraction
or the weight of many languages that
precipitated the tower’s failed architec-

ture. That one monolithic language .

would have expedited the building, and
heaven ‘would have been reached.
Whose heaven, she wonders? And what
kind? Perhaps the achievement of Par-
adise was premature, a little hasty if no

one could take the time to understand’

other languages, other views, other
narratives. Had they, the heaven they
imagined might have been found at
their feet. Complicated, demanding,
yes, but a view of heaven as life; not
heaven as post-life.



--- Page 10 ---
She would not want to leave her young
visitors with the impression that lan-
guage should be forced to stay alive
merely to be. The vitality of language
lies in its ability to limn the actual,
imagined and possible lives of its speak-
ers, readers, writers. Although its poise
is sometimes in displacing experience,
it is not a substitute for it. It arcs to-
ward the place where meaning may lie.
When a President of the United States
thought about the graveyard his coun-
try had become, and said, “The world
will little note nor lor remember
what we say here. But it will never for-
get what they did here,” his simple
words were exhilarating in their life-
sustaining properties because they re-
fused to encapsulate the reality of
600,000 dead men in a cataclysmic race
war. Refusing to monumentalize, dis-
daining the “final word,” the precise
“summing up,” acknowledging their

“poor power to add or detract,” his
words signal deference to the uncap-
turability of the life it mourns. It is the
deference that moves her, that recogni-
tion that language can never live up to
life once and for all. Nor should it. Lan-
guage can never “pin down” slavery,
genocide, war. Nor should it yearn for
the arrogance to be able to do so. Its
force, its felicity, is in its reach toward
the ineffable.

Be it grand or slender, burrowing,
blasting or refusing to sanctify;
whether. it laughs out loud or is a
cry without an alphabet, the choice
word or the chosen silence, unmolested
language surges toward knowledge,
not its destruction. But who does
not know of literature banned because
it is interrogative; discredited be-
cause it is critical; erased because

alternate? And how many are out-



--- Page 11 ---
raged by the thought of a self-ravaged
tongue?

Word-work is sublime, she thinks, be-
cause it is generative; it makes meaning
that secures our difference, our human
difference—the way in which we are
like no other life.

We die. That may be the meaning of”

life. But we do language. That may be

. the measure.of our lives.

“Once upon a time...” Visitors ask an
old woman a question. Who are they,
these children? What did they make of
that encounter? What did they hear in
those final words: “The bird is in your
hands”? A sentence that gestures to-
ward possibility, or one that drops a

latch? Perhaps what the children heard
was, “It is not my problem. lam old, fe-
male, black, blind. What wisdom I have
now is in knowing I cannot help you.

The future of language is yours.”

They stand there. Suppose nothing was
in their hands. Suppose the visit was
only a ruse, a trick to get to be spoken
to, taken seriously as they have not
been before. A chance to interrupt, to
violate the adult world, its miasma of
discourse about them. Urgent ques-
tions are at stake, including the one
they have asked: “Is the bird we hold
living or dead?” Perhaps the question
meant: “Could someone tell us what is
life? What is death?” No trick at all; no
silliness. A straightforward question
worthy of the attention of a wise one.
An old one. And if the old and wise who
have lived life and faced death cannot
describe either, who can?



--- Page 12 ---
But she does not; she keeps her secret,
her good opinion of herself, her gnomic

pronouncements, her art without com~

mitment. She keeps her distance,

_ enforces it and retreats into the singu-
larity of isolation, in sophisticated,
privileged space.

Nothing, no word follows her declara-
tion of transfer. That silence is deep,
deeper than the meaning available in
the words she has spoken. It shivers,
this silence, and the children, annoyed,
fill it with language invented on the
spot.

“Is there no speech,” they ask her, “no
words you can give us that help us
break through your dossier of failures?
through the education you have just
given us that is no education at all:
because we are paying close attention
to what you have done as well as to

eeneicsneeieos

what you have said? to the barrier you
have erected between generosity and
wisdom?

“We have no bird in our hands, living or
dead. We have only you and our impor-
tant question. Is the nothing in our
hands something you could not bear to
contemplate, to even guess? Don’t you
remember being young, when language
was magic without meaning? When

what you could say, could not mean? |

When the invisible was what imagina-
tion strove to see? When questions and
demands for answers burned so
brightly you trembled with fury at not
knowing?

“Do we have to begin consciousness
with a battle heroes and heroines like
you have already fought and lost, leav-
ing us with nothing in our hands except
what you have imagined is there? Your



--- Page 13 ---
answer is artful, but its artfulness em-
barrasses us and ought to embarrass
you. Your answer is indecent in its self-
congratulation. A made-for-television
script that makes no sense if there is
nothing in our hands.

“Why didn’t you reach out, touch us
with your soft fingers, delay the sound
bite, the lesson, until you knew who we
were? Did you so despise our trick, our
modus operandi, that you could not see
that we were baffled about how to get
your attention? We are young. Unripe.
‘We have heard all our short lives that
we have to be responsible. What could
that possibly mean in the catastrophe
this world has become; where, as a poet
said, “nothing needs to be exposed
since it is already barefaced”? Our in-
heritance is an affront. You want us to
have your old, blank eyes and see only
cruelty and mediocrity. Do you think

we are stupid enough to perjure our-
selves again and again with the fiction
of nationhood? How dare you talk to us
of duty when we stand waist deep in the
toxin of your past?

“You trivialize us and trivialize the bird
that is not in our hands. Is there no
context for our lives? No song, no liter-
ature, no poem full of vitamins, no his-
tory connected to experience that you
can pass along to help us start strong?
You are an adult. The old one, the wise
one. Stop thinking about saving your
face. Think of our lives and tell us your
particularized world. Make up a story.
Narrative is radical, creating us at the
very moment it is being created. We
will not blame you if your reach exceeds
your grasp; if love so ignites your

words that they go down in flames and
nothing is left but their scald. Or if,
with the reticence of a surgeon’s hands,



--- Page 14 ---
your words suture only the places
where blood might flow. We know you
can never do it properly—once and for
all. Passion is never enough; neither is
skill. But try. For our sake and yours
forget your name in the street; tell us
what the world has been to you in the
dark places and in the light. Don’t tell
us what to believe, what. to fear. Show
us belief’s wide skirt and the stitch that
unravels fear’s caul. You, old woman,
blessed with blindness, can speak the
language that tells us what only lan-
guage can: how to see without pictures.
Language alone protects us from the
scariness of things with no names. Lan-
guage alone is meditation.

“Tell us what it is to be a woman so that
we may know what it is to be a man.
What moves at the margin. What it is
to have no home in this place. To be set
adrift from the one you knew. What it is

to live at the edge of towns that cannot
bear your company.

“Tell us about ships turned away from
shorelines at Easter, placenta in a field.
Tell us about a wagonload of slaves,
how they sang so softly their breath
was indistinguishable from the failing
snow. How they knew from the hunch
of the nearest shoulder that the next
stop wouid be their last. How, with
hands prayered in their sex, they
thought of heat, then sun. Lifting their
faces as though it was there for the
taking. Turning as though there for
the taking. They stop at an inn. The
driver and his mate go in with the
lamp, leaving them humming in the
dark. The horse’s void steams into the
snow beneath its hooves and the hiss
and melt are the envy of the freezing
slaves.



--- Page 15 ---
“The inn door opens: a girl and a boy
step away from its light. They climb
into the wagon bed. The boy will have a
gun in three years, but now he carries a
lamp and a jug of warm cider. They
pass it from mouth to mouth. The girl
offers bread, pieces of meat and some-
thing more: a glance into the eyes of the
one she serves. One helping for each
man, two for each woman. And a look.
They look back. The next stop will be
their last..But not this one. This one is
warmed.”

It’s quiet again when the children finish
speaking, until the woman breaks into
the silence.

“Finally,” she says. “I trust you now. I
trust you with the bird that is not in
your hands because you have truly
caught it. Look. How lovely it is, this

2

thing we have done—together.’

The Acceptance Speech

YOUR MAJESTIES,
YOUR HIGHNESSES,
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I entered this hall pleasantly haunted

by those who have entered it before me.
That company of laureates is both
daunting and welcoming, for among its |
lists are names of persons whose work
has made whole worlds available to me.
The sweep and specificity of their art
have sometimes broken my heart with
the courage and clarity of its vision.
The astonishing brilliance with which

they practiced their craft has chal--



--- Page 16 ---
lenged and nurtured my own. My debt
to them rivals the profound one I owe
to the Swedish Academy for having se-
lected me to join that distinguished

alumni.

Early in October an artist friend left a
message which I kept on the answering
service for weeks and played back every
once in a while just to hear the trem-
bling pleasure in her voice and the faith
in her words. “My dear sister,” she said,
“the prize that is yours is also ours and
could not have been placed in better
hands.” The spirit of her message with
its earned optimism and sublime trust
marks this day for me.

I will leave this hall, however, with a
new and much more delightful haunt-
ing than the one I felt upon entering:
that is the company of the laureates yet
to come. Those who, even as I speak,

are mining, sifting and polishing lan-
guages for illuminations none of us has
dreamed of. But whether or not any one
of them secures a place in this pan-
theon, the gathering of these writers is
unmistakable and mounting. Their
voices bespeak civilizations gone and
yet to be; the precipice from which their
imaginations gaze will rivet us; they do
not blink or turn away.

It is, therefore, mindful of the gifts of
my predecessors, the blessing of my sis-
ters, in joyful anticipation of writers to
come that I accept the honor the Swed-
ish Academy has done me, and ask you
to share what is for me a moment of
grace.

— TONI MORRISON,
December, 1993



